The old story about climate protection is that it's costly,,or it would have been done already.,So government needs to make us do something painful to fix it.,The new story about climate protection,is that it's not costly, but profitable.,This was a simple sign error,,because it's cheaper to save fuel than to buy fuel,,as is well known to companies that do it all the time --,for example, Dupont, SD micro electronics.,Many other firms -- IBM -- are reducing their energy intensity,routinely six percent a year by fixing up their plants,,and they get their money back in two or three years.,That's called a profit. 
 Now, similarly, the old story about oil is that if we wanted to save very much of it,,it would be expensive, or we would have done it already,,because markets are essentially perfect.,If, of course, that were true, there would be no innovation,,and nobody could make any money.,But the new story about oil,is the government doesn't have to force us to do painful things to get off oil --,not just incrementally, but completely --,quite the contrary. The United States, for example,,can completely eliminate its use of oil,and rejuvenate the economy at the same time,,led by business for profit,,because it's so much cheaper to save and substitute for the oil,than to keep on buying it.,This process will also be catalyzed by the military,for its own reasons of combat effectiveness and preventing conflict,,particularly over oil. 
 This thesis is set out in a book called "Winning the Oil Endgame",that four colleagues and I wrote,and have posted for free at Oilendgame.com --,about 170,000 downloads so far.,And it was co-sponsored by the Pentagon --,it's independent, it's peer-reviewed,and all of the backup calculations are transparently posted for your perusal.,Now, a bit of economic history, I think, may be helpful here.,Around 1850, one of the biggest U.S. industries was whaling.,And whale oil lit practically every building.,But in the nine years before Drake struck oil, in 1859,,at least five-sixths of that whale oil-illuminating market disappeared,,thanks to fatal competitors, chiefly oil and gas made from coal,,to which the whalers had not been paying attention.,So, very unexpectedly, they ran out of customers,before they ran out of whales.,The remnant whale populations were saved by technological innovators,and profit-maximizing capitalists. 
 (Laughter) 
 And it's funny -- it feels a bit like this now for oil.,We've been spending the last few decades,accumulating a very powerful backlog of technologies,for saving and substituting for oil,,and no one had bothered to add them up before.,So when we did, we found some very surprising things.,Now, there are two big reasons to be concerned about oil.,Both national competitiveness and national security are at risk.,On the competitiveness front,,we all know that Toyota has more market cap than the big three put together.,And serious competition from Europe, from Korea,,and next is China, which will soon be a major net exporter of cars.,How long do you think it will take before you can drive home your new,wally-badged Shanghai automotive super-efficient car?,Maybe a decade, according to my friends in Detroit.,China has an energy policy,based on radical energy efficiency and leap-frog technology.,They're not going to export your uncle's Buick. 
 And after that comes India.,The point here is, these cars are going to be made super efficient.,The question is, who will make them?,Will we in the United States continue to import efficient cars to replace foreign oil,,or will we make efficient cars and import neither the oil nor the cars?,That seems to make more sense.,The more we keep on using the oil, particularly the imported oil,,the more we face a very obvious array of problems.,Our analysis assumes that they all cost nothing,,but nothing is not the right number.,It could well be enough to double the oil price, for example.,And one of the worst of these,is what it does to our standing in the world,if other countries think that everything we do is about oil,,if we have to treat countries that have oil,differently than countries that don't have oil. 
 And our military get quite unhappy,with having to stand guard on pipelines in Far-off-istan,when what they actually signed up for,was to protect American citizens.,They don't like fighting over oil,,they don't like being in the sands,and they don't like where the oil money goes,and what sort of instability it creates.,Now, in order to avoid these problems,,whatever you think they're worth, it's actually not that complicated.,We can save half the oil by using it more efficiently,,at a cost of 12 dollars per saved barrel.,And then we can replace the other half,with a combination of advanced bio-fuels and safe natural gas.,And that costs on average under 18 dollars a barrel.,And compared with the official forecast,,that oil will cost 26 dollars a barrel in 2025,,which is half of what we've been paying lately, 
 that will save 70 billion dollars a year, starting quite soon.,Now, in order to do this we need to invest about 180 billion dollars:,half of it to retool the car, truck and plane industries;,half of it to build the advanced bio-fuel industry.,In the process, we will gain about a million good jobs, mainly rural.,And protect another million jobs now at risk, mainly in auto-making.,And we'll also get returns over 150 billion dollars a year.,So that's a very handsome return.,It's financeable in the private capital market.,But if you want it for the reasons I just mentioned,,to happen sooner and with higher confidence,,then -- and also to expand choice and manage risk --,then you might like some light-handed public policies,that support rather than distorting or opposing the business logic.,And these policies work fine without taxes, subsidies or mandates.,They make a little net money for the treasury. 
 They have a broad trans-ideological appeal,,and because we want them actually to happen,,we figured out ways to do them,that do not require much, if any, federal legislation,,and can, indeed, be done administratively or at a state level.,Just to illustrate what to do about the nub of the problem,,namely, light vehicles,,here are four ultra-light carbon-composite concept cars with low drag,,and all but the one at the upper left have hybrid drive.,You can sort of have it all with these things.,For example, this Opel two-seater,does 155 miles an hour at 94 miles a gallon.,This muscle car from Toyota: 408 horsepower in an ultra-light,that does zero to 60 in well under four seconds,,and still gets 32 miles a gallon. I'll say more later about this. 
 And in the upper left, a pioneering effort 14 years ago by GM --,84 miles a gallon without even using a hybrid, in a four-seater.,Well, saving that fuel, 69 percent of the fuel in light vehicles,costs about 57 cents per saved gallon.,But it's even a better deal for heavy trucks,,where you save a similar amount at 25 cents a gallon,,with better aerodynamics and tires and engines, and so on,,and taking out weight so you can put it into payload.,So you can double efficiency with a 60 percent internal rate of return.,Then you can go even further, almost tripling efficiency,with some operational improvements,,double the big haulers' margins.,And we intend to use those numbers to create demand pull, and flip the market. 
 In the airplane business, it's again a similar story,where the first 20 percent fuel saving is free,,as Boeing is now demonstrating in its new Dreamliner.,But then the next generation of planes saves about half.,Again, much cheaper than buying the fuel.,And if you go over the next 15 years or so to a blended-wing body,,kind of a flying wing with internal engines,,then you get about a factor three efficiency improvement,at comparable or lower cost.,Let me focus a minute on the light vehicles, the cars and light trucks,,because we all know the most about those;,probably everybody here drives one.,And yet we may not realize that in a standard sedan,,of all the fuel energy you feed into the car,,seven-eighths never gets to the wheels;,it's lost first in the engine, idling at zero miles a gallon,,the power train and accessories. 
 So then of the energy that does get to the wheels,,only an eighth of it, half of that, goes to heat the tires on the road,,or to heat the air the car pushes aside.,And only this little bit, only six percent,actually ends up accelerating the car,and then heating the brakes when you stop.,In fact, since 95 percent of the weight you're moving is the car not the driver,,less than one percent of the fuel energy ends up moving the driver.,This is not very gratifying,after more than a century of devoted engineering effort. 
 (Laughter) 
 (Applause) 
 Moreover, three-fourths of the fuel use is caused by the weight of the car.,And it's obvious from the diagram that every unit of energy you save at the wheels,is going to avoid wasting another seven units of energy,getting that energy to the wheels.,So there's huge leverage for making the car a lot lighter.,And the reason this has not been very seriously examined before,is there was a common assumption in the industry that --,well, then it might not be safe if you got whacked by a heavy car,,and it would cost a lot more to make,,because the only way we know how to make cars much lighter,was to use expensive light metals like aluminum and magnesium.,But these objections are now vanishing through advances in materials. 
 For example, we use a lot of carbon-fiber composites,in sporting goods.,And it turns out that these are quite remarkable for safety.,Here's a handmade McLaren SLR carbon car that got t-boned by a Golf.,The Golf was totaled.,The McLaren just popped off and scratched the side panel.,They'll pop it back on and fix the scratch later.,But if this McLaren were to run into a wall at 65 miles an hour,,the entire crash energy would be absorbed,by a couple of woven carbon-fiber composite cones,,weighing a total of 15 pounds, hidden in the front end.,Because these materials could actually absorb,six to 12 times as much energy per pound as steel,,and do so a lot more smoothly. 
 And this means we've just cracked the conundrum of safety and weight.,We could make cars bigger, which is protective, but make them light.,Whereas if we made them heavy, they'd be both hostile and inefficient.,And when you make them light in the right way,,that can be simpler and cheaper to make.,You can end up saving money, and lives, and oil, all at the same time.,I showed here two years ago,a little bit about a design of your basic, uncompromised,,quintupled-efficiency suburban-assault vehicle --,(Laughter),-- and this is a complete virtual design,that is production-costed manufacturable. 
 And the process needed to make it,is actually coming toward the market quite nicely.,We figured out a kind of a digital inkjet printer,for this very stiff, strong, carbon-composite material,,and then ways to thermoform it,,because it's a combination of carbon and nylon,,into whatever complex shapes you want,,like the one just shown at the auto show by one of the tier-one suppliers.,And the manufacturing you can do this way gets radically simplified.,Because the auto body has only, say, 14 parts, instead of 100, 150.,Each one is formed by one fairly cheap die set,,instead of four expensive ones for stamping steel.,Each of the parts can be easily lifted with no hoist.,They snap together like a kid's toy.,So you got rid of the body shop. 
 And if you want, you can lay color in the mold, and get rid of the paint shop.,Those are the two hardest and costliest parts of making a car.,So you end up with at least two-fifths lower capital intensity,than the leanest plant in the industry, which GM has in Lansing.,The plant also gets smaller.,Now, when you go through a similar analysis for every way we use oil,,including buildings, industry, feedstocks and so on,,you find that of the 28 million barrels a day,the government says we will need in 2025,,well, about eight of that can be removed by efficiency by then,,with another seven still being saved as the vehicle stocks turn over,,at an average cost of only 12 bucks a barrel,,instead of 26 for buying the oil.,And then another six can be made robustly, competitively,,from cellulosic ethanol and a little bio-diesel,,without interfering at all with the water or land needs of crop production. 
 There is a huge amount of gas to be saved,,about half the projected gas at about an eighth of its price.,And here are some no-brainer substitutions of it, with lots left over.,So much, in fact, that after you've handled the domestic oil forecast,from areas already approved,,you have only this little bit left, and let's see how we can meet that,,because there's a pretty flexible menu of ways.,We could, of course, buy more efficiency.,Maybe you ought to buy efficiency at 26 bucks instead of 12.,Or wait to capture the second half of it.,Or we could, of course, just get this little bit,by continuing to import some Canadian and Mexican oil,,or the ethanol the Brazilians would love to sell us.,But they'll sell it to Japan and China instead,,because we have tariff barriers to protect our corn farmers, and they don't. 
 Or we could use the saved gas directly to cover all of this balance,,or if we used it as hydrogen, which is more profitable and efficient,,we'd get rid of the domestic oil too.,And that doesn't even count, for example,,that available land in the Dakotas can cost effectively,make enough wind power to run every highway vehicle in the country.,So we have lots of options.,And the choice of menu and timing is quite flexible.,Now, to make this happen quicker and with higher confidence,,there is a few ways government could help.,For example, fee-bates, a combination of a fee and a rebate,in any size class of vehicle you want,,can increase the price of inefficient vehicles,and correspondingly pay you a rebate for efficient vehicles.,You're not paid to change size class.,You are paid to pick efficiency within a size class,,in a way equivalent to looking at all fourteen years of life-cycle fuel savings,rather than just the first two or three. 
 This expands choice rapidly in the market,,and actually makes more money for automakers as well.,I'd like to deal with the lack of affordable personal mobility in this country,by making it very cheaply possible for low-income families,to get efficient, reliable, warranted new cars,that they could otherwise never get.,And for each car so financed, scrap almost one clunker,,preferably the dirtiest ones.,This creates a new million-car-a-year market for Detroit,from customers they weren't going to get otherwise,,because they weren't creditworthy and could never afford a new car.,And Detroit will make money on every unit.,It turns out that if, say, African-American and white households,had the same car ownership,,it would cut employment disparity about in half,by providing better access to job opportunities.,So this is a huge social win, too. 
 Governments buy hundreds of thousands of cars a year.,There are smart ways to buy them and to aggregate that purchasing power,to bring very efficient vehicles into the market faster.,And we could even do an X Prize-style golden carrot,that's worth stretching further for.,For example, a billion-dollar prize for the first U.S. automaker,to sell 200,000 really advanced vehicles, like some you saw earlier.,Then the legacy airlines can't afford to buy the efficient new planes,they desperately need to cut their fuel bills,,but if you felt philosophically you wanted to do anything about that,,there are ways to finance it. 
 And at the same time to scrap inefficient old planes,,so that if they were otherwise to come back in the air,,they would waste more oil,,and block the uptake of efficient, new planes.,Those part inefficient planes,are worth more to society dead than alive.,We ought to take them out back and shoot them,,and put bounty hunters after them.,Then there's an important military role.,That in creating the move to high-volume,,low-cost commercial production of these kinds of materials,,or for that matter, ultra-light steels,that are a good backup technology,,the military can do the trick it did,in turning DARPAnet into the Internet.,Just turn it over to the private sector, and we have an Internet. 
 The same for GPS.,The same for the modern semi-conductor industry.,That is, military science and technology that they need,can create the advanced materials-industrial cluster,that transforms its civilian economy and gets the country off oil,,which would be a huge contribution to eliminating conflict over oil,and advancing national and global security.,Then we need to retool the car industry and do retraining,,and shift the convergence of the energy and ag-value chains,to shift faster from hydrocarbons to carbohydrates,,and get out of our own way in other ways.,And make the transition to more efficient vehicles go faster. 
 But here's how the whole thing fits together.,Instead of official forecasts of oil use,and oil imports going forever up,,they can turn down with the 12 dollars a barrel efficiency,,down steeply by adding the supply-side substitutions at 18 bucks,,all implemented at slower rates than we've done before when we paid attention.,And if we start adding tranches of hydrogen in there,,we are rapidly off imports and completely off oil in the 2040s. 
 And the one thing I'd like to point out here is that we've done this before.,In this eight-year period, 1977 to 85, when we last paid attention,,the economy grew 27 percent, oil use fell 17 percent,,oil imports fell 50 percent, oil imports from the Persian Gulf fell 87 percent.,They would have been gone if we'd kept that up one more year.,Well, that was with very old technologies and delivery methods. 
 We could rerun that play a lot better now.,And yet what we proved then is the U.S. has more market power than OPEC.,Ours is on the demand side.,We are the Saudi Arabia of "nega-barrels." (Laughter),We can use less oil faster than they can conveniently sell less oil. 
 (Applause) 
 Whatever your reason for wanting to do this,,whether you're concerned about national security or price volatility --,(Laughter),-- or jobs, or the planet, or your grand-kids,,it seems to me that this is an oil endgame,that we should all be playing to win.,Please download your copy, and thank you very much. 
 (Applause)Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.,My name is Art Benjamin,nand I am a "mathemagician.",What that means is, I combinenmy loves of math and magic,to do something I call "mathemagics." 
 But before I get started, I havena quick question for the audience.,By any chance, did anyone happen,to bring with themnthis morning a calculator?,Seriously, if you have a calculatornwith you, raise your hand.,Raise your hand. Did your hand go up?,Now bring it out, bring it out.nAnybody else?,I see, I see one way in the back.,You sir, that's three.,And anybody on this side here?,OK, over there on the aisle.,Would the four of younplease bring out your calculators,,then join me up on stage.,Let's give them a nice round of applause. 
 (Applause) 
 That's right.,Now, since I haven't had the chancento work with these calculators,,I need to make surenthat they are all working properly.,Would somebody get us started by giving usna two-digit number, please?,How about a two-digit number? 
 Audience: 22. 
 AB: 22. And another two-digit number, sir? 
 Audience: 47. 
 AB: Multiply 22 times 47,nmake sure you get 1,034,,or the calculators are not working.,Do all of you get 1,034? 1,034? 
 Volunteer: No. 
 AB: 594. Let's give three of themna nice round of applause there. 
 (Applause) 
 Would you like to try a morenstandard calculator, just in case?,OK, great.,What I'm going to try and do then --,I notice it took some of youna little bit of time to get your answer.,That's OK.,I'll give you a shortcut for multiplyingneven faster on the calculator.,There is something callednthe square of a number,,which most of you know is taking a numbernand multiplying it by itself.,For instance, five squared would be? 
 Audience: 25. 
 AB: 25. The way we cannsquare on most calculators --,let me demonstrate with this one --,is by taking the number, such as five,,hitting "times" and then "equals,",and on most calculatorsnthat will give you the square.,On some of these ancient RPN calculators,,you've got an "x squared" button on it,,will allow you to donthe calculation even faster.,What I'm going to try and donnow is to square, in my head,,four two-digit numbers,faster than they can donon their calculators,,even using the shortcut method.,What I'll use is the second row this time,,and I'll get four of you,to each yell out a two-digit number,,and if you would square the first number,,and if you would square the second,nthe third and the fourth,,I will try and race you to the answer. OK?,So quickly, a two-digit number please. 
 Audience: 37. 
 Arthur Benjamin: 37 squared, OK. 
 Audience: 23. 
 AB: 23 squared, OK. 
 Audience: 59. 
 AB: 59 squared, OK, and finally? 
 Audience: 93. 
 AB: 93 squared.,Would you call out your answers, please? 
 Volunteer: 1369.nAB: 1369. 
 Volunteer: 529.nAB: 529. 
 Volunteer: 3481.nAB: 3481. 
 Volunteer: 8649. 
 AB: Thank you very much. 
 (Applause) 
 Let me try to take this one step further.,I'm going to try to squarensome three-digit numbers this time.,I won't even write these down --,I'll just call them outnas they're called out to me.,Anyone I point to, call outna three-digit number.,Anyone on our panel, verify the answer.,Just give some indication if it's right.,A three-digit number, sir, yes? 
 Audience: 987. 
 AB: 987 squared is 974,169. 
 (Laughter) 
 AB: Yes? Good.,Another three-digit -- 
 (Applause),-- another three-digit number, sir? 
 Audience: 457. 
 AB: 457 squared is 205,849.,205,849?,AB: Yes?,OK, another, anothernthree-digit number, sir? 
 Audience: 321. 
 AB: 321 is 103,041.,103,041.,Yes? One more three-digit number please. 
 Audience: Oh, 722. 
 AB: 722 is 500, that's a harder one.,Is that 513,284? 
 Volunteer: Yes. 
 AB: Yes? Oh, one more, one morenthree-digit number please. 
 Audience: 162.,162 squared is 26,244. 
 Volunteer: Yes. 
 Thank you very much. 
 (Applause) 
 (Applause ends) 
 Let me try to take this one step further. 
 (Laughter) 
 I'm going to try to squarena four-digit number this time.,You can all take your time on this;,I will not beat younto the answer on this one,,but I will try to get the answer right.,To make this a little bit more random,nlet's take the fourth row this time,,let's say, one, two, three, four.,If each of you would call outna single digit between zero and nine,,that will be the four-digitnnumber that I'll square. 
 Nine. 
 Seven. 
 Five. 
 Eight.,9,758, this will take me a little bitnof time, so bear with me.,95 million -- 
 (Sighs),218,564? 
 Volunteer: Yes! 
 AB: Thank you very much. 
 (Applause) 
 (Applause ends) 
 Now, I would attempt to squarena five-digit number --,and I can --,but unfortunately,nmost calculators cannot. 
 (Laughter) 
 Eight-digit capacity --ndon't you hate that?,So, since we've reachednthe limits of our calculators --,what's that?,Does yours go higher? 
 Volunteer: I don't know. 
 AB: Oh, yours does? 
 Volunteer: I can probably do it.nAB: I'll talk to you later.,In the meanwhile, let me conclude,the first part of my show by doingnsomething a little trickier.,Let's take the largest numbernon the board here, 8649.,Would you each enternthat on your calculator?,And instead of squaring it this time,,I want you to takenthat number and multiply it,by any three-digit number that you want,,but don't tell menwhat you're multiplying by --,just multiply it by any randomnthree-digit number.,So you should have as an answer either,a six-digit or probablyna seven-digit number.,How many digits do you have, six or seven? 
 Seven, and yours? 
 Seven? Seven?,And, uncertain. 
 Seven.,Is there any possible waynthat I could know,what seven-digit numbers you have?,Say "No." 
 (Laughter) 
 Good, then I shall attemptnthe impossible --,or at least the improbable.,What I'd like each of younto do is to call out for me,any six of your seven digits,nany six of them,,in any order you'd like. 
 (Laughter) 
 One digit at a time,,I shall try and determinenthe digit you've left out.,Starting with your seven-digit number,,call out any six of them please. 
 Volunteer: 1, 9, 7, 0, 4, 2. 
 AB: Did you leave out the number 6? 
 Good, OK, that's one.,You have a seven-digit number,ncall out any six of them please. 
 Volunteer: 4, 4, 8, 7, 5. 
 I think I only heard five numbers.nI -- wait -- 44875 --,did you leave out the number 6? 
 Same as she did, OK.,You've got a seven-digit number --,call out any six of them loud and clear. 
 Volunteer: 0, 7, 9, 0, 4, 4. 
 I think you left out the number 3? 
 AB: That's three.,The odds of me gettingnall four of these right by random guessing,would be one in 10,000:n10 to the fourth power.,OK, any six of them. 
 (Laughter) 
 Really scramble them up this time, please. 
 Volunteer: 2, 6, 3, 9, 7, 2. 
 Did you leave out the number 7?,And let's give all four of these peoplena nice round of applause.,Thank you very much. 
 (Applause) 
 (Applause ends),For my next number -- 
 (Laughter) 
 while I mentally recharge my batteries,,I have one more question for the audience.,By any chance, does anybodynhere happen to know,the day of the weeknthat they were born on?,If you think you knownyour birth day, raise your hand.,Let's see, starting with --nlet's start with a gentleman first.,What year was it, first of all?,That's why I pick a gentleman first. 
 Audience: 1953. 
 1953, and the month?,November what?,23rd -- was that a Monday? 
 Audience: Yes. 
 Good. Somebody else?,I haven't seen any women's hands up.,OK, how about you, what year?,1949, and the month?,October what?,Fifth -- was that a Wednesday?,Yes! I'll go way to the backnright now, how about you?,Yell it out, what year? 
 Audience: 1959. 
 1959, OK -- and the month? 
 Audience: February.,February what? 
 Sixth -- was that a Friday?nAudience: Yes. 
 Good, how about the person behind her?,Call out, what year was it? 
 Audience: 1947.nAB: 1947, and the month? 
 Audience: May.nAB: May what? 
 Seventh -- would that be a Wednesday? 
 Audience: Yes.nAB: Thank you very much. 
 (Applause) 
 Anybody here who'd like to knownthe day of the week they were born?,We can do it that way.,Of course, I could just make upnan answer and you wouldn't know,,so I come prepared for that.,I brought with me a book of calendars.,It goes as far back into the past as 1800,nbecause you never know. 
 (Laughter) 
 I didn't mean to look at you, sir --nyou were just sitting there. 
 (Laughter) 
 Anyway, Chris, you can help menout here, if you wouldn't mind.,This is a book of calendars.,Who wanted to know their birth day?,What year was it, first of all? 
 Audience: 1966. 
 66 -- turn to the calendar with 1966.,And what month? 
 Audience: April.nAB: April what? 
 Audience: 17th. 
 I believe that was a Sunday.,Can you confirm, Chris? 
 Chris Anderson: Yes. 
 AB: I'll tell you what, Chris:,as long as you haventhat book in front of you,,do me a favor, turn to a yearnoutside of the 1900s,,either into the 1800snor way into the 2000s --,that'll be a much greaternchallenge for me.,AB: What year would you like?nCA: 1824. 
 AB: 1824, OK.,AB: And what month? 
 CA: June. 
 AB: June what?nCA: Sixth. 
 AB: Was that a Sunday? 
 CA: It was.nAB: And it was cloudy. 
 (Laughter) 
 Good, thank you very much. 
 (Applause) 
 (Applause ends) 
 But I'd like to wrap things up now,by alluding to somethingnfrom earlier in the presentation.,There was a gentleman up herenwho had a 10-digit calculator.,Where is he, would you stand up,,10-digit guy?,OK, stand up for me just for a second,,so I can see where you are.,You have a 10-digit calculator,nsir, as well?,OK, what I'm going to trynand do, is to square in my head,a five-digit number requiringna 10-digit calculator.,But to make my job more interestingnfor you, as well as for me,,I'm going to do this problemnthinking out loud.,So you can actually, honestly hear,what's going on in my mindnwhile I do a calculation of this size. 
 Now, I have to apologizento our magician friend Lennart Green.,I know as a magician we're not supposednto reveal our secrets,,but I'm not too afraid,that people are going to startndoing my show next week, so --,I think we're OK. 
 (Laughter) 
 (Applause) 
 So, let's see,,let's take a different row of people,nstarting with you.,I'll get five digits:none, two, three, four.,Oh, I did this row already.,Let's do the row before you,,starting with you:none, two, three, four, five.,Call out a single digit --,that will be the five-digit numbernthat I will try to square, go ahead. 
 Five. 
 Seven. 
 Six. 
 Eight. 
 Three.,57,683 --,squared.,Yuck. 
 Let me explain to younhow I'm going to attempt this problem.,I'm going to break the problemndown into three parts.,I'll do 57,000 squared,,plus 683 squared,,plus 57,000 times 683 times two.,Add all those numbers together,,and with any luck, arrive at the answer.,Now, let me recap. 
 (Laughter) 
 Thank you. 
 (Laughter) 
 While I explain something else -- 
 (Laughter) 
 -- I know, that you can use, right? 
 (Laughter) 
 While I do these calculations,,you might hear certain words,,as opposed to numbers,ncreep into the calculation.,Let me explain what that is.,This is a phonetic code,,a mnemonic device that I use,,that allows me to convertnnumbers into words.,I store them as words, and later onnretrieve them as numbers.,I know it sounds complicated; it's not.,I don't want you to think you're seeingnsomething out of "Rain Man." 
 (Laughter) 
 There's definitelyna method to my madness --,definitely, definitely.,Sorry. 
 (Laughter) 
 If you want to talk to menabout ADHD afterwards,,you can talk to me then.,By the way, one last instruction,,for my judges with the calculators --,you know who you are --,there is at least a 50 percent chancenthat I will make a mistake here.,If I do, don't tell menwhat the mistake is;,just say, "you're close,"nor something like that,,and I'll try and figure out the answer --,which could be prettynentertaining in itself.,If, however, I am right,,whatever you do,ndon't keep it to yourself, OK? 
 (Laughter) 
 Make sure everybody knowsnthat I got the answer right,,because this is my big finish, OK.,So, without any more stalling,,here we go.,I'll start the problemnin the middle, with 57 times 683.,57 times 68 is 3,400, plus 476 is 3876,,that's 38,760 plus 171,,38,760 plus 171 is 38,931.,38,931; double that to get 77,862.,77,862 becomes cookie fission,,cookie fission is 77,822.,That seems right, I'll go on.nCookie fission, OK.,Next, I do 57 squared,nwhich is 3,249, so I can say,,three billion.,Take the 249, add that to cookie, 249,,oops, but I see a carry coming --,249 --,add that to cookie, 250 plus 77,,is 327 million --,fission, fission, OK,nfinally, we do 683 squared,,that's 700 times 666, plus 17 squared,is 466,489, rev up if I need it,,rev up, take the 466,,add that to fission, to get,,oh gee --,328,489. 
 Audience: Yeah!nAB: Good. 
 Thank you very much. 
 (Applause),I hope you enjoyed mathemagics. 
 Thank you. 
 (Applause)What I'd like to talk about is really the biggest problems in the world.,I'm not going to talk about "The Skeptical Environmentalist" --,probably that's also a good choice.,(Laughter) 
 But I am going talk about: what are the big problems in the world?,And I must say, before I go on, I should ask every one of you,to try and get out pen and paper,because I'm actually going to ask you to help me to look at how we do that.,So get out your pen and paper.,Bottom line is, there is a lot of problems out there in the world.,I'm just going to list some of them.,There are 800 million people starving.,There's a billion people without clean drinking water.,Two billion people without sanitation.,There are several million people dying of HIV and AIDS.,The lists go on and on.,There's two billions of people who will be severely affected by climate change -- so on.,There are many, many problems out there. 
 In an ideal world, we would solve them all, but we don't.,We don't actually solve all problems.,And if we do not, the question I think we need to ask ourselves --,and that's why it's on the economy session -- is to say,,if we don't do all things, we really have to start asking ourselves,,which ones should we solve first?,And that's the question I'd like to ask you.,If we had say, 50 billion dollars over the next four years to spend,to do good in this world, where should we spend it?,We identified 10 of the biggest challenges in the world,,and I will just briefly read them:,climate change, communicable diseases, conflicts, education,,financial instability, governance and corruption,,malnutrition and hunger, population migration,,sanitation and water, and subsidies and trade barriers.,We believe that these in many ways,encompass the biggest problems in the world.,The obvious question would be to ask,,what do you think are the biggest things?,Where should we start on solving these problems?,But that's a wrong problem to ask.,That was actually the problem that was asked in Davos in January. 
 But of course, there's a problem in asking people to focus on problems.,Because we can't solve problems.,Surely the biggest problem we have in the world is that we all die.,But we don't have a technology to solve that, right?,So the point is not to prioritize problems,,but the point is to prioritize solutions to problems.,And that would be -- of course that gets a little more complicated.,To climate change that would be like Kyoto.,To communicable diseases, it might be health clinics or mosquito nets.,To conflicts, it would be U.N.'s peacekeeping forces, and so on.,The point that I would like to ask you to try to do,,is just in 30 seconds -- and I know this is in a sense,an impossible task -- write down what you think,is probably some of the top priorities.,And also -- and that's, of course, where economics gets evil --,to put down what are the things we should not do, first.,What should be at the bottom of the list?,Please, just take 30 seconds, perhaps talk to your neighbor,,and just figure out what should be the top priorities,and the bottom priorities of the solutions that we have,to the world's biggest issues. 
 The amazing part of this process -- and of course, I mean,,I would love to -- I only have 18 minutes,,I've already given you quite a substantial amount of my time, right?,I'd love to go into, and get you to think about this process,,and that's actually what we did.,And I also strongly encourage you,,and I'm sure we'll also have these discussions afterwards,,to think about, how do we actually prioritize?,Of course, you have to ask yourself,,why on Earth was such a list never done before?,And one reason is that prioritization is incredibly uncomfortable.,Nobody wants to do this.,Of course, every organization would love to be on the top of such a list.,But every organization would also hate to be not on the top of the list.,And since there are many more not-number-one spots on the list,than there is number ones, it makes perfect sense,not to want to do such a list.,We've had the U.N. for almost 60 years,,yet we've never actually made a fundamental list,of all the big things that we can do in the world,,and said, which of them should we do first?,So it doesn't mean that we are not prioritizing --,any decision is a prioritization, so of course we are still prioritizing,,if only implicitly -- and that's unlikely to be as good,as if we actually did the prioritization,,and went in and talked about it. 
 So what I'm proposing is really to say that we have,,for a very long time, had a situation when we've had a menu of choices.,There are many, many things we can do out there,,but we've not had the prices, nor the sizes.,We have not had an idea.,Imagine going into a restaurant and getting this big menu card,,but you have no idea what the price is.,You know, you have a pizza; you've no idea what the price is.,It could be at one dollar; it could be 1,000 dollars.,It could be a family-size pizza;,it could be a very individual-size pizza, right?,We'd like to know these things. 
 And that is what the Copenhagen Consensus is really trying to do --,to try to put prices on these issues.,And so basically, this has been the Copenhagen Consensus' process.,We got 30 of the world's best economists, three in each area.,So we have three of world's top economists write about climate change.,What can we do? What will be the cost,and what will be the benefit of that?,Likewise in communicable diseases.,Three of the world's top experts saying, what can we do?,What would be the price?,What should we do about it, and what will be the outcome?,And so on. 
 Then we had some of the world's top economists,,eight of the world's top economists, including three Nobel Laureates,,meet in Copenhagen in May 2004.,We called them the "dream team.",The Cambridge University prefects decided to call them,the Real Madrid of economics.,That works very well in Europe, but it doesn't really work over here.,And what they basically did was come out with a prioritized list.,And then you ask, why economists?,And of course, I'm very happy you asked that question -- (Laughter) --,because that's a very good question.,The point is, of course, if you want to know about malaria,,you ask a malaria expert.,If you want to know about climate, you ask a climatologist.,But if you want to know which of the two you should deal with first,,you can't ask either of them, because that's not what they do.,That is what economists do.,They prioritize.,They make that in some ways disgusting task of saying, which one should we do first,,and which one should we do afterwards? 
 So this is the list, and this is the one I'd like to share with you.,Of course, you can also see it on the website,,and we'll also talk about it more, I'm sure, as the day goes on.,They basically came up with a list where they said,there were bad projects -- basically, projects,where if you invest a dollar, you get less than a dollar back.,Then there's fair projects, good projects and very good projects.,And of course, it's the very good projects we should start doing.,I'm going to go from backwards,so that we end up with the best projects. 
 These were the bad projects.,As you might see the bottom of the list was climate change.,This offends a lot of people, and that's probably one of the things,where people will say I shouldn't come back, either.,And I'd like to talk about that, because that's really curious.,Why is it it came up?,And I'll actually also try to get back to this,because it's probably one of the things,that we'll disagree with on the list that you wrote down. 
 The reason why they came up with saying that Kyoto --,or doing something more than Kyoto -- is a bad deal,is simply because it's very inefficient.,It's not saying that global warming is not happening.,It's not saying that it's not a big problem.,But it's saying that what we can do about it,is very little, at a very high cost.,What they basically show us, the average of all macroeconomic models,,is that Kyoto, if everyone agreed, would cost about 150 billion dollars a year.,That's a substantial amount of money.,That's two to three times the global development aid,that we give the Third World every year.,Yet it would do very little good.,All models show it will postpone warming for about six years in 2100.,So the guy in Bangladesh who gets a flood in 2100 can wait until 2106.,Which is a little good, but not very much good.,So the idea here really is to say, well, we've spent a lot of money doing a little good. 
 And just to give you a sense of reference,,the U.N. actually estimate that for half that amount,,for about 75 billion dollars a year,,we could solve all major basic problems in the world.,We could give clean drinking water, sanitation, basic healthcare,and education to every single human being on the planet.,So we have to ask ourselves, do we want to spend twice the amount,on doing very little good?,Or half the amount on doing an amazing amount of good?,And that is really why it becomes a bad project.,It's not to say that if we had all the money in the world, we wouldn't want to do it.,But it's to say, when we don't, it's just simply not our first priority. 
 The fair projects -- notice I'm not going to comment on all these --,but communicable diseases, scale of basic health services -- just made it,,simply because, yes, scale of basic health services is a great thing.,It would do a lot of good, but it's also very, very costly.,Again, what it tells us is suddenly,we start thinking about both sides of the equation.,If you look at the good projects, a lot of sanitation and water projects came in.,Again, sanitation and water is incredibly important,,but it also costs a lot of infrastructure.,So I'd like to show you the top four priorities,which should be at least the first ones that we deal with,when we talk about how we should deal with the problems in the world. 
 The fourth best problem is malaria -- dealing with malaria.,The incidence of malaria is about a couple of [million] people get infected every year.,It might even cost up towards a percentage point of GDP,every year for affected nations.,If we invested about 13 billion dollars over the next four years,,we could bring that incidence down to half.,We could avoid about 500,000 people dying,,but perhaps more importantly, we could avoid about a [million] people,getting infected every year.,We would significantly increase their ability,to deal with many of the other problems that they have to deal with --,of course, in the long run, also to deal with global warming. 
 This third best one was free trade.,Basically, the model showed that if we could get free trade,,and especially cut subsidies in the U.S. and Europe,,we could basically enliven the global economy,to an astounding number of about 2,400 billion dollars a year,,half of which would accrue to the Third World.,Again, the point is to say that we could actually pull,two to three hundred million people out of poverty,,very radically fast, in about two to five years.,That would be the third best thing we could do. 
 The second best thing would be to focus on malnutrition.,Not just malnutrition in general, but there's a very cheap way,of dealing with malnutrition, namely, the lack of micronutrients.,Basically, about half of the world's population is lacking in,iron, zinc, iodine and vitamin A.,If we invest about 12 billion dollars,,we could make a severe inroad into that problem.,That would be the second best investment that we could do. 
 And the very best project would be to focus on HIV/AIDS.,Basically, if we invest 27 billion dollars over the next eight years,,we could avoid 28 new million cases of HIV/AIDS.,Again, what this does and what it focuses on is saying,there are two very different ways that we can deal with HIV/AIDS.,One is treatment; the other one is prevention.,And again, in an ideal world, we would do both.,But in a world where we don't do either, or don't do it very well,,we have to at least ask ourselves where should we invest first.,And treatment is much, much more expensive than prevention.,So basically, what this focuses on is saying, we can do a lot more,by investing in prevention.,Basically for the amount of money that we spend,,we can do X amount of good in treatment,,and 10 times as much good in prevention.,So again, what we focus on is prevention rather than treatment,,at first rate. 
 What this really does is that it makes us think about our priorities.,I'd like to have you look at your priority list and say,,did you get it right?,Or did you get close to what we came up with here?,Well, of course, one of the things is climate change again.,I find a lot of people find it very, very unlikely that we should do that. 
 We should also do climate change,,if for no other reason, simply because it's such a big problem.,But of course, we don't do all problems.,There are many problems out there in the world.,And what I want to make sure of is, if we actually focus on problems,,that we focus on the right ones.,The ones where we can do a lot of good rather than a little good.,And I think, actually -- Thomas Schelling,,one of the participants in the dream team, he put it very, very well.,One of things that people forget, is that in 100 years,,when we're talking about most of the climate change impacts will be,,people will be much, much richer.,Even the most pessimistic impact scenarios of the U.N.,estimate that the average person in the developing world in 2100,will be about as rich as we are today.,Much more likely, they will be two to four times richer than we are.,And of course, we'll be even richer than that. 
 But the point is to say, when we talk about saving people,,or helping people in Bangladesh in 2100,,we're not talking about a poor Bangladeshi.,We're actually talking about a fairly rich Dutch guy.,And so the real point, of course, is to say,,do we want to spend a lot of money helping a little,,100 years from now, a fairly rich Dutch guy?,Or do we want to help real poor people, right now, in Bangladesh,,who really need the help, and whom we can help very, very cheaply?,Or as Schelling put it, imagine if you were a rich -- as you will be --,a rich Chinese, a rich Bolivian, a rich Congolese, in 2100,,thinking back on 2005, and saying, "How odd that they cared so much,about helping me a little bit through climate change,,and cared so fairly little about helping my grandfather,and my great grandfather, whom they could have helped so much more,,and who needed the help so much more?" 
 So I think that really does tell us why it is,we need to get our priorities straight.,Even if it doesn't accord to the typical way we see this problem.,Of course, that's mainly because climate change has good pictures.,We have, you know, "The Day After Tomorrow" -- it looks great, right?,It's a good film in the sense that,I certainly want to see it, right, but don't expect Emmerich,to cast Brad Pitt in his next movie,digging latrines in Tanzania or something. (Laughter),It just doesn't make for as much of a movie.,So in many ways, I think of the Copenhagen Consensus,and the whole discussion of priorities,as a defense for boring problems.,To make sure that we realize it's not about making us feel good.,It's not about making things that have the most media attention,,but it's about making places where we can actually do the most good. 
 The other objections, I think, that are important to say,,is that I'm somehow -- or we are somehow -- positing a false choice.,Of course, we should do all things,,in an ideal world -- I would certainly agree.,I think we should do all things, but we don't.,In 1970, the developed world decided we were going to spend,twice as much as we did, right now, than in 1970, on the developing world.,Since then our aid has halved.,So it doesn't look like we're actually on the path,of suddenly solving all big problems. 
 Likewise, people are also saying, but what about the Iraq war?,You know, we spend 100 billion dollars --,why don't we spend that on doing good in the world?,I'm all for that.,If any one of you guys can talk Bush into doing that, that's fine.,But the point, of course, is still to say,,if you get another 100 billion dollars,,we still want to spend that in the best possible way, don't we?,So the real issue here is to get ourselves back,and think about what are the right priorities.,I should just mention briefly, is this really the right list that we got out?,You know, when you ask the world's best economists,,you inevitably end up asking old, white American men.,And they're not necessarily, you know,,great ways of looking at the entire world. 
 So we actually invited 80 young people from all over the world,to come and solve the same problem.,The only two requirements were that they were studying at the university,,and they spoke English.,The majority of them were, first, from developing countries.,They had all the same material but they could go vastly,outside the scope of discussion, and they certainly did,,to come up with their own lists.,And the surprising thing was that the list was very similar --,with malnutrition and diseases at the top,and climate change at the bottom.,We've done this many other times.,There's been many other seminars and university students, and different things.,They all come out with very much the same list.,And that gives me great hope, really, in saying that I do believe,that there is a path ahead to get us to start thinking about priorities,,and saying, what is the important thing in the world?,Of course, in an ideal world, again we'd love to do everything.,But if we don't do it, then we can start thinking about where should we start? 
 I see the Copenhagen Consensus as a process.,We did it in 2004,,and we hope to assemble many more people,,getting much better information for 2008, 2012.,Map out the right path for the world --,but also to start thinking about political triage.,To start thinking about saying, "Let's do,not the things where we can do very little at a very high cost,,not the things that we don't know how to do,,but let's do the great things where we can do an enormous,amount of good, at very low cost, right now." 
 At the end of the day, you can disagree,with the discussion of how we actually prioritize these,,but we have to be honest and frank about saying,,if there's some things we do, there are other things we don't do.,If we worry too much about some things,,we end by not worrying about other things.,So I hope this will help us make better priorities,,and think about how we better work for the world.,Thank you.In the year 1919,,a virtually unknown German mathematician, named Theodor Kaluza,suggested a very bold and, in some ways, a very bizarre idea.,He proposed that our universe,might actually have more than the three dimensions,that we are all aware of.,That is in addition to left, right, back, forth and up, down,,Kaluza proposed that there might be additional dimensions of space,that for some reason we don't yet see.,Now, when someone makes a bold and bizarre idea,,sometimes that's all it is -- bold and bizarre,,but it has nothing to do with the world around us.,This particular idea, however --,although we don't yet know whether it's right or wrong,,and at the end I'll discuss experiments which, in the next few years,,may tell us whether it's right or wrong --,this idea has had a major impact on physics in the last century,and continues to inform a lot of cutting-edge research. 
 So, I'd like to tell you something about the story of these extra dimensions.,So where do we go?,To begin we need a little bit of back story. Go to 1907.,This is a year when Einstein is basking in the glow,of having discovered the special theory of relativity,and decides to take on a new project,,to try to understand fully the grand, pervasive force of gravity.,And in that moment, there are many people around,who thought that that project had already been resolved.,Newton had given the world a theory of gravity in the late 1600s,that works well, describes the motion of planets,,the motion of the moon and so forth,,the motion of apocryphal of apples falling from trees,,hitting people on the head.,All of that could be described using Newton's work. 
 But Einstein realized that Newton had left something out of the story,,because even Newton had written,that although he understood how to calculate the effect of gravity,,he'd been unable to figure out how it really works.,How is it that the Sun, 93 million miles away,,[that] somehow it affects the motion of the Earth?,How does the Sun reach out across empty inert space and exert influence?,And that is a task to which Einstein set himself --,to figure out how gravity works.,And let me show you what it is that he found.,So Einstein found,that the medium that transmits gravity is space itself.,The idea goes like this:,imagine space is a substrate of all there is. 
 Einstein said space is nice and flat, if there's no matter present.,But if there is matter in the environment, such as the Sun,,it causes the fabric of space to warp, to curve.,And that communicates the force of gravity.,Even the Earth warps space around it.,Now look at the Moon.,The Moon is kept in orbit, according to these ideas,,because it rolls along a valley in the curved environment,that the Sun and the Moon and the Earth can all create by virtue of their presence.,We go to a full-frame view of this.,The Earth itself is kept in orbit,because it rolls along a valley in the environment that's curved,because of the Sun's presence.,That is this new idea about how gravity actually works. 
 Now, this idea was tested in 1919 through astronomical observations.,It really works. It describes the data.,And this gained Einstein prominence around the world.,And that is what got Kaluza thinking.,He, like Einstein, was in search of what we call a unified theory.,That's one theory,that might be able to describe all of nature's forces from one set of ideas,,one set of principles, one master equation, if you will.,So Kaluza said to himself,,Einstein has been able to describe gravity,in terms of warps and curves in space --,in fact, space and time, to be more precise.,Maybe I can play the same game with the other known force,,which was, at that time, known as the electromagnetic force --,we know of others today, but at that time,that was the only other one people were thinking about.,You know, the force responsible for electricity,and magnetic attraction and so forth. 
 So Kaluza says, maybe I can play the same game,and describe electromagnetic force in terms of warps and curves.,That raised a question: warps and curves in what?,Einstein had already used up space and time,,warps and curves, to describe gravity.,There didn't seem to be anything else to warp or curve.,So Kaluza said, well, maybe there are more dimensions of space.,He said, if I want to describe one more force,,maybe I need one more dimension.,So he imagined that the world had four dimensions of space, not three,,and imagined that electromagnetism was warps and curves,in that fourth dimension. Now here's the thing:,when he wrote down the equations describing warps and curves,in a universe with four space dimensions, not three,,he found the old equations that Einstein had already derived in three dimensions --,those were for gravity --,but he found one more equation because of the one more dimension.,And when he looked at that equation,,it was none other than the equation,that scientists had long known to describe the electromagnetic force.,Amazing -- it just popped out.,He was so excited by this realization,that he ran around his house screaming, "Victory!" --,that he had found the unified theory. 
 Now clearly, Kaluza was a man who took theory very seriously.,He, in fact --,there is a story that when he wanted to learn how to swim,,he read a book, a treatise on swimming --,(Laughter),-- then dove into the ocean.,This is a man who would risk his life on theory.,Now, but for those of us who are a little bit more practically minded,,two questions immediately arise from his observation.,Number one: if there are more dimensions in space, where are they?,We don't seem to see them.,And number two: does this theory really work in detail,,when you try to apply it to the world around us?,Now, the first question was answered in 1926,by a fellow named Oskar Klein.,He suggested that dimensions might come in two varieties --,there might be big, easy-to-see dimensions,,but there might also be tiny, curled-up dimensions,,curled up so small, even though they're all around us,,that we don't see them. 
 Let me show you that one visually.,So, imagine you're looking at something,like a cable supporting a traffic light.,It's in Manhattan. You're in Central Park -- it's kind of irrelevant --,but the cable looks one-dimensional from a distant viewpoint,,but you and I all know that it does have some thickness.,It's very hard to see it, though, from far away.,But if we zoom in and take the perspective of, say,,a little ant walking around --,little ants are so small that they can access all of the dimensions --,the long dimension,,but also this clockwise, counter-clockwise direction.,And I hope you appreciate this.,It took so long to get these ants to do this. 
 (Laughter) 
 But this illustrates the fact that dimensions can be of two sorts:,big and small. And the idea that maybe the big dimensions around us,are the ones that we can easily see,,but there might be additional dimensions curled up,,sort of like the circular part of that cable,,so small that they have so far remained invisible.,Let me show you what that would look like.,So, if we take a look, say, at space itself --,I can only show, of course, two dimensions on a screen.,Some of you guys will fix that one day,,but anything that's not flat on a screen is a new dimension,,goes smaller, smaller, smaller,,and way down in the microscopic depths of space itself,,this is the idea,,you could have additional curled up dimensions -- 
 here is a little shape of a circle -- so small that we don't see them.,But if you were a little ultra microscopic ant walking around,,you could walk in the big dimensions that we all know about --,that's like the grid part --,but you could also access the tiny curled-up dimension,that's so small that we can't see it with the naked eye,or even with any of our most refined equipment.,But deeply tucked into the fabric of space itself,,the idea is there could be more dimensions, as we see there.,Now that's an explanation,about how the universe could have more dimensions than the ones that we see.,But what about the second question that I asked:,does the theory actually work,when you try to apply it to the real world? 
 Well, it turns out that Einstein and Kaluza and many others,worked on trying to refine this framework,and apply it to the physics of the universe,as was understood at the time, and, in detail, it didn't work.,In detail, for instance,,they couldn't get the mass of the electron,to work out correctly in this theory.,So many people worked on it, but by the '40s, certainly by the '50s,,this strange but very compelling idea,of how to unify the laws of physics had gone away.,Until something wonderful happened in our age.,In our era, a new approach to unify the laws of physics,is being pursued by physicists such as myself,,many others around the world,,it's called superstring theory, as you were indicating.,And the wonderful thing is that superstring theory,has nothing to do at first sight with this idea of extra dimensions,,but when we study superstring theory,,we find that it resurrects the idea in a sparkling, new form. 
 So, let me just tell you how that goes.,Superstring theory -- what is it?,Well, it's a theory that tries to answer the question:,what are the basic, fundamental, indivisible, uncuttable constituents,making up everything in the world around us?,The idea is like this.,So, imagine we look at a familiar object, just a candle in a holder,,and imagine that we want to figure out what it is made of.,So we go on a journey deep inside the object and examine the constituents.,So deep inside -- we all know, you go sufficiently far down, you have atoms.,We also all know that atoms are not the end of the story.,They have little electrons that swarm around a central nucleus,with neutrons and protons.,Even the neutrons and protons have smaller particles inside of them known as quarks.,That is where conventional ideas stop. 
 Here is the new idea of string theory.,Deep inside any of these particles, there is something else.,This something else is this dancing filament of energy.,It looks like a vibrating string --,that's where the idea, string theory comes from.,And just like the vibrating strings that you just saw in a cello,can vibrate in different patterns,,these can also vibrate in different patterns.,They don't produce different musical notes.,Rather, they produce the different particles making up the world around us.,So if these ideas are correct,,this is what the ultra-microscopic landscape of the universe looks like.,It's built up of a huge number,of these little tiny filaments of vibrating energy,,vibrating in different frequencies.,The different frequencies produce the different particles.,The different particles are responsible,for all the richness in the world around us. 
 And there you see unification,,because matter particles, electrons and quarks,,radiation particles, photons, gravitons, are all built up from one entity.,So matter and the forces of nature all are put together,under the rubric of vibrating strings.,And that's what we mean by a unified theory.,Now here is the catch.,When you study the mathematics of string theory,,you find that it doesn't work,in a universe that just has three dimensions of space.,It doesn't work in a universe with four dimensions of space, nor five, nor six.,Finally, you can study the equations, and show that it works,only in a universe that has 10 dimensions of space,and one dimension of time.,It leads us right back to this idea of Kaluza and Klein --,that our world, when appropriately described,,has more dimensions than the ones that we see. 
 Now you might think about that and say, well,,OK, you know, if you have extra dimensions, and they're really tightly curled up,,yeah, perhaps we won't see them, if they're small enough.,But if there's a little tiny civilization of green people walking around down there,,and you make them small enough, and we won't see them either. That is true.,One of the other predictions of string theory --,no, that's not one of the other predictions of string theory. 
 (Laughter) 
 But it raises the question:,are we just trying to hide away these extra dimensions,,or do they tell us something about the world?,In the remaining time, I'd like to tell you two features of them.,First is, many of us believe that these extra dimensions,hold the answer to what perhaps is the deepest question,in theoretical physics, theoretical science.,And that question is this: when we look around the world,,as scientists have done for the last hundred years,,there appear to be about 20 numbers that really describe our universe.,These are numbers like the mass of the particles,,like electrons and quarks, the strength of gravity,,the strength of the electromagnetic force --,a list of about 20 numbers,that have been measured with incredible precision,,but nobody has an explanation,for why the numbers have the particular values that they do. 
 Now, does string theory offer an answer?,Not yet.,But we believe the answer for why those numbers have the values they do,may rely on the form of the extra dimensions.,And the wonderful thing is, if those numbers,had any other values than the known ones,,the universe, as we know it, wouldn't exist.,This is a deep question.,Why are those numbers so finely tuned,to allow stars to shine and planets to form,,when we recognize that if you fiddle with those numbers --,if I had 20 dials up here,and I let you come up and fiddle with those numbers,,almost any fiddling makes the universe disappear.,So can we explain those 20 numbers?,And string theory suggests that those 20 numbers,have to do with the extra dimensions.,Let me show you how.,So when we talk about the extra dimensions in string theory,,it's not one extra dimension,,as in the older ideas of Kaluza and Klein.,This is what string theory says about the extra dimensions.,They have a very rich, intertwined geometry. 
 This is an example of something known as a Calabi-Yau shape --,name isn't all that important.,But, as you can see,,the extra dimensions fold in on themselves,and intertwine in a very interesting shape, interesting structure.,And the idea is that if this is what the extra dimensions look like,,then the microscopic landscape of our universe all around us,would look like this on the tiniest of scales.,When you swing your hand,,you'd be moving around these extra dimensions over and over again,,but they're so small that we wouldn't know it.,So what is the physical implication, though, relevant to those 20 numbers? 
 Consider this. If you look at the instrument, a French horn,,notice that the vibrations of the airstreams,are affected by the shape of the instrument.,Now in string theory,,all the numbers are reflections of the way strings can vibrate.,So just as those airstreams,are affected by the twists and turns in the instrument,,strings themselves will be affected,by the vibrational patterns in the geometry within which they are moving.,So let me bring some strings into the story.,And if you watch these little fellows vibrating around --,they'll be there in a second -- right there,,notice that they way they vibrate is affected,by the geometry of the extra dimensions. 
 So, if we knew exactly what the extra dimensions look like --,we don't yet, but if we did --,we should be able to calculate the allowed notes,,the allowed vibrational patterns.,And if we could calculate the allowed vibrational patterns,,we should be able to calculate those 20 numbers.,And if the answer that we get from our calculations,agrees with the values of those numbers,that have been determined,through detailed and precise experimentation,,this in many ways would be the first fundamental explanation,for why the structure of the universe is the way it is.,Now, the second issue that I want to finish up with is:,how might we test for these extra dimensions more directly?,Is this just an interesting mathematical structure,that might be able to explain,some previously unexplained features of the world,,or can we actually test for these extra dimensions?,And we think -- and this is, I think, very exciting --,that in the next five years or so we may be able to test,for the existence of these extra dimensions. 
 Here's how it goes. In CERN, Geneva, Switzerland,,a machine is being built called the Large Hadron Collider.,It's a machine that will send particles around a tunnel,,opposite directions, near the speed of light.,Every so often those particles will be aimed at each other,,so there's a head-on collision.,The hope is that if the collision has enough energy,,it may eject some of the debris from the collision,from our dimensions, forcing it to enter into the other dimensions.,How would we know it?,Well, we'll measure the amount of energy after the collision,,compare it to the amount of energy before,,and if there's less energy after the collision than before,,this will be evidence that the energy has drifted away.,And if it drifts away in the right pattern that we can calculate,,this will be evidence that the extra dimensions are there. 
 Let me show you that idea visually.,So, imagine we have a certain kind of particle called a graviton --,that's the kind of debris we expect to be ejected out,,if the extra dimensions are real.,But here's how the experiment will go.,You take these particles. You slam them together.,You slam them together, and if we are right,,some of the energy of that collision,will go into debris that flies off into these extra dimensions.,So this is the kind of experiment,that we'll be looking at in the next five, seven to 10 years or so.,And if this experiment bears fruit,,if we see that kind of particle ejected,by noticing that there's less energy in our dimensions,than when we began,,this will show that the extra dimensions are real. 
 And to me this is a really remarkable story,,and a remarkable opportunity. Going back to Newton with absolute space --,didn't provide anything but an arena, a stage,in which the events of the universe take place.,Einstein comes along and says,,well, space and time can warp and curve -- that's what gravity is.,And now string theory comes along and says,,yes, gravity, quantum mechanics, electromagnetism,,all together in one package,,but only if the universe has more dimensions than the ones that we see.,And this is an experiment that may test for them in our lifetime.,Amazing possibility.,Thank you very much. 
 (Applause)When I knew I was going to come to speak to you, I thought,,"I gotta call my mother.",I have a little Cuban mother -- she's about that big.,Four feet. Nothing larger than the sum of her figurative parts.,You still with me? (Laughter),I called her up.,"Hello, how're you doing, baby?","Hey, ma, I got to talk to you.","You're talking to me already. What's the matter?",I said, "I've got to talk to a bunch of nice people.","You're always talking to nice people, except when you went,to the White House.","Ma, don't start!",And I told her I was coming to TED, and she said,,"What's the problem?",And I said, "Well, I'm not sure.",I said, "I have to talk to them about stories.,It's 'Technology, Entertainment and Design.'",And she said, "Well, you design a story when you make it up,,it's entertainment when you tell it,,and you're going to use a microphone.",(Laughter),I said, "You're a peach, ma. Pop there?","What's the matter? The pearls of wisdom,leaping from my lips like lemmings is no good for you?",(Laughter),Then my pop got on there.,My pop, he's one of the old souls, you know --,old Cuban man from Camaguey.,Camaguey is a province in Cuba.,He's from Florida.,He was born there in 1924.,He grew up in a bohio of dirt floors,,and the structure was the kind used by the Tainos,,our old Arawak ancestors.,My father is at once quick-witted, wickedly funny,,and then poignancy turns on a dime and leaves you breathless.,"Papi, help.","I already heard your mother. I think she's right.",(Laughter),"After what I just told you?",My whole life, my father's been there.,So we talked for a few minutes, and he said,,"Why don't you tell them what you believe?",I love that, but we don't have the time.,Good storytelling is crafting a story that someone wants to listen to.,Great story is the art of letting go.,So I'm going to tell you a little story.,Remember, this tradition comes to us,not from the mists of Avalon, back in time, but further still,,before we were scratching out these stories on papyrus,,or we were doing the pictographs on walls in moist, damp caves.,Back then, we had an urge, a need, to tell the story.,When Lexus wants to sell you a car, they're telling you a story.,Have you been watching the commercials?,Because every one of us has this desire, for once -- just once --,to tell our story and have it heard.,There are stories you tell from stages.,There's stories that you may tell,in a small group of people with some good wine.,And there's stories you tell late at night to a friend,,maybe once in your life.,And then there are stories that we whisper into a Stygian darkness.,I'm not telling you that story.,I'm telling you this one.,It's called, "You're Going to Miss Me.",It's about human connection.,My Cuban mother, which I just briefly introduced you to,in that short character sketch,,came to the United States one thousand years ago.,I was born in 19 -- I forget, and I came to this country,with them in the aftermath of the Cuban revolution.,We went from Havana, Cuba to Decatur, Georgia.,And Decatur, Georgia's a small Southern town.,And in that little Southern town, I grew up,,and grew up hearing these stories.,But this story only happened a few years ago.,I called my mom.,It was a Saturday morning.,And I was calling about how to make ajiaco. It's a Cuban meal.,It's delicious. It's savory.,It makes spit froth in the little corners of your mouth --,is that enough? It makes your armpits juicy, you know?,That kind of food, yeah.,This is the sensory part of the program, people.,I called my mother, and she said, "Carmen, I need you to come, please.,I need to go to the mall, and you know your father now,,he takes a nap in the afternoon, and I got to go.,I got an errand to run.",Let me parenthetically pause here and tell you --,Esther, my mother, had stopped driving several years ago,,to the collective relief of the entire city of Atlanta.,Any vehicular outing with that woman from the time I was a young child,,guys, naturally included flashing, blue lights.,But she'd become adept at dodging the boys in blue,,and when she did meet them, oh, she had wonderful, well, rapport.,"Ma'am, did you know that was a light you just ran?",(Spanish),"You don't speak English?","No.",(Laughter),But eventually, every dog has its day,,and she ended up in traffic court,,where she bartered with the judge for a discount.,There's a historical marker.,But now she was a septuagenarian, she'd stopped driving.,And that meant that everyone in the family had to sign up,to take her to have her hair dyed, you know,,that peculiar color of blue that matches her polyester pants suit,,you know, same color as the Buick.,Anybody? All right.,Little picks on the legs, where she does her needlepoint, and leaves little loops.,Rockports -- they're for this.,That's why they call them that.,(Laughter),This is her ensemble.,And this is the woman that wants me to come on a Saturday morning,when I have a lot to do, but it doesn't take long because Cuban guilt is a weighty thing.,I'm not going political on you but ... And so, I go to my mother's.,I show up. She's in the carport.,Of course, they have a carport.,The kind with the corrugated roof, you know.,The Buick's parked outside,,and she's jingling, jangling a pair of keys.,"I got a surprise for you, baby!","We taking your car?","Not we, I.",And she reaches into her pocket and pulls out a catastrophe.,Somebody's storytelling. Interactive art. You can talk to me.,Oh, a driver's license, a perfectly valid driver's license.,Issued, evidently, by the DMV in her own county of Gwinnett.,Blithering fucking idiots.,(Laughter),I said, "Is that thing real?","I think so.","Can you even see?","I guess I must.","Oh, Jesus.",She gets into the car -- she's sitting on two phone books.,I can't even make this part up because she's that tiny.,She's engineered an umbrella so she can -- bam! -- slam the door.,Her daughter, me, the village idiot with the ice cream cone,in the middle of her forehead, is still standing there, slack-jawed.,"You coming? You no coming?","Oh, my God." I said, "OK, fine. Does pop know you're driving?","Are you kidding me?","How are you doing it?","He's got to sleep sometime.",And so we left my father fast asleep, because I knew he'd kill me,if I let her go by herself, and we get in the car.,Puts it in reverse. Fifty-five out of the driveway, in reverse.,I am buckling in seatbelts from the front.,I'm yanking them in from the back. I'm doing double knots.,I mean, I've got a mouth as dry as the Kalahari Desert.,I've got a white-knuckle grip on the door. You know what I'm talking about?,And she's whistling, and finally I do the kind of,birth breathing -- you know, that one?,Only a couple of women are going uh-huh, uh-huh, uh-huh. Right.,And I said, "Ma, would you slow down?",Because now she's picked up the Highway 285,,the perimeter around Atlanta, which encompasses now --,there's seven lanes, she's on all of them, y'all.,I said, "Ma, pick a lane!","They give you seven lanes, they expect you to use them.",And there she goes, right.,I don't believe for a minute she has been out and not been stopped.,So, I think, hey, we can talk. It'll be a diversion.,It'll help my breathing. It'll do something for my pulse, maybe.,"Mommy, I know you have been stopped.","No, no, what you talking about?","You have a license. How long have you been driving?","Four or five days.","Yeah. And you haven't been stopped?","I did not get a ticket.",I said, "Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, but come on, come on, come on.","OK, so I stopped at a light,and there's a guy, you know, in the back.","Would this guy have, like, a blue uniform,and a terrified look on his face?","You weren't there, don't start.","Come on. You got a ticket?","No." She explained,,"The man" -- I have to tell you as she did,,because it loses something if I don't, you know --,"he come to the window, and he does a thing like this,,which tells me he's pretty old, you know.,So I look up and I'm thinking,,maybe he's still going to think I'm kind of cute.","Ma, are you still doing that?","If it works, it works, baby.,So, I say, 'Perdon, yo no hablo ingles.',Well, wouldn't you know, he had been in Honduras for the Peace Corps.",(Laughter),So he's talking to her, and at some point she says,,"Then, you know, it was it. That was it. It was done.","Yeah? What?,He gave you a ticket? He didn't give you a ticket? What?","No, I look up, and the light, she change.",(Laughter),You should be terrified.,Now, I don't know if she's toying with me,,kind of like a cat batting back a mouse, batting back a mouse --,left paw, right paw, left paw, right paw --,but by now, we've reached the mall.,Now, you have all been at a mall during the holidays, yes?,Talk to me. Yes. Yes. You can say yes.,Audience: Yes.,Carmen Agra Deedy: All right, then you know that you have now entered parking lot purgatory,,praying to that saint of perpetual availability,that as you join that serpentine line of cars crawling along,,some guy's going to turn on the brake lights,just as you pull up behind him.,But that doesn't happen most of the time, right?,So, first I say, "Ma, why are we here?","You mean, like, in the car?","No, don't -- why are we here today?,It's Saturday. It's the holidays.","Because I have to exchange your father's underwear.",Now, see, this is the kind of Machiavellian thinking,,that you really have to -- you know, in my mind, it's a rabbit's warren,,this woman's mind.,Do I want to walk in, because unless I have Ariadne's thread to anchor --,enough metaphors for you? -- somewhere, I may not get out.,But you know.,(Laughter),"Why do we have to take pop's underwear back now?,And why? What is wrong with his underwear?","It will upset you.","It won't upset me. Why? What? Is something wrong with him?","No, no, no. The only thing with him is, he's an idiot.,I sent him to the store, which was my first mistake,,and he went to buy underwear, and he bought the grippers,,and he's supposed to buy the boxers.","Why?","I read it on the Intersnet. You cannot have children.","Oh, my God!",(Laughter),Olivia? Huh? Huh?,By now, we have now crawled another four feet,,and my mother finally says to me, "I knew it, I knew it.,I'm an immigrant. We make a space. What I tell you? Right there.",And she points out the passenger window, and I look out,,and three -- three -- aisles down,,"Look, the Chevy.",You want to laugh, but you don't know --,you're that politically corrected, have you noticed?,Correct the other direction now, it's OK.,"Look, the Chevy -- he's coming this way.","Mama, mama, mama, wait, wait, wait. The Chevy is three aisles away.",She looks at me like I'm her, you know, her moron child,,the cretin, the one she's got to speak to very slowly and distinctly.,"I know that, honey. Get out of the car,and go stand in the parking space till I get there.",OK, I want a vote. Come on, come on. No, no.,How many of you once in your -- you were a kid, you were an adult --,you stood in a parking space to hold it for someone?,See, we're a secret club with a secret handshake.,(Laughter),And years of therapy later, we're doing great.,We're doing great. We're doing fine.,Well, I stood up to her.,This is -- you know, you'd think by now I'm -- and still holding?,I said, "No way, ma, you have embarrassed me my entire life.",Of course, her comeback is, "When have I embarrassed you?",(Spanish),And she's still talking while she puts the car in park,,hits the emergency brake, opens the door,,and with a spryness astounding in a woman her age,,she jumps out of the car, knocks out the phone books,,and then she walks around --,she's carrying her cheap Kmart purse with her --,around the front of the car.,She has amazing land speed for a woman her age, too.,Before I know it, she has skiddled across the parking lot,and in between the cars, and people behind me, with that kind of,usual religious charity that the holidays bring us, wah-wah wah-wah.,"I'm coming." Italian hand signals follow.,I scoot over. I close the door. I leave the phone books.,This is new and fast, just so you -- are you still with us?,We'll wait for the slow ones. OK.,I start, and this is where a child says to me --,and the story doesn't work if I tell you about her before,,because this is my laconic child.,A brevity, brevity of everything with this child.,You know, she eats small portions.,Language is something to be meted out,in small phonemes, you know -- just little hmm, hmm-hmm.,She carries a mean spiral notebook and a pen.,She wields great power.,She listens, because that's what people who tell stories do first.,But she pauses occasionally and says,,"How do you spell that? What year? OK.",When she writes the expose in about 20 years,,don't believe a word of it.,But this is my daughter, Lauren, my remarkable daughter,,my borderline Asperger's kid.,Bless you, Dr. Watson.,She says, "Ma, you got to look!",Now, when this kid says I got to look, you know.,But it isn't like I haven't seen this crime scene before.,I grew up with this woman.,I said, "Lauren, you know what, give me a play-by-play. I can't.","No, mama, you got to look.",I got to look. You got to look.,Don't you want to look?,There she is.,I look in bewildered awe:,she's standing, those Rockports slightly apart, but grounded.,She's holding out that cheap Kmart purse, and she is wielding it.,She's holding back tons of steel with the sheer force,of her little personality, in that crone-ish voice, saying things like,,"Back it up, buddy! No, it's reserved!",(Laughter),Ready? Brace yourselves. Here it comes.,"No, my daughter, she's coming in the Buick.,Honey, sit up so they can see you.",Oh, Jesus. Oh, Jesus.,I finally come -- and now, it's the South.,I don't know what part of the country you live in.,I think we all secretly love stories.,We all secretly want our blankie and our Boo Bear.,We want to curl up and say, "Tell it to me, tell it to me.,Come on, honey, tell it to me.",But in the South, we love a good story.,People have pulled aside,,I mean, they've come out of that queue line,,they have popped their trunks, pulled out lawn chairs and cool drinks.,Bets are placed.,"I'm with the little lady. Damn!",(Laughter),And she's bringing me in with a slight salsa movement.,She is, after all, Cuban.,I'm thinking, "Accelerator, break. Accelerator, break.",Like you've never thought that in your life? Right? Yeah.,I pull in. I put the car in park.,Engine's still running -- mine, not the car.,I jump out next to her going, "Don't you move!","I'm not going anywhere.",She's got front seat in a Greek tragedy.,I come out, and there's Esther.,She's hugging the purse.,"Que?" Which means "what," and so much more.,(Laughter),"Ma, have you no shame?,People are watching us all around," right?,Now, some of them you've got to make up, people.,Secret of the trade.,Guess what? Some of these stories I sculpt a little, here and there.,Some, they're just right there, right there. Put them right there.,She says this to me.,After I say -- let me refresh you --,"have you no shame?","No. I gave it up with pantyhose -- they're both too binding.",(Laughter),(Applause),Yeah, you can clap, but then you're about 30 seconds from the end.,I'm about to snap like a brittle twig, when suddenly someone taps me on the shoulder.,Intrepid soul.,I'm thinking, "This is my kid. How dare she?,She jumped out of that car.",That's OK, because my mother yells at me, I yell at her.,It's a beautiful hierarchy, and it works.,(Laughter),I turn around, but it's not a child. It's a young woman,,a little taller than I, pale green, amused eyes.,With her is a young man -- husband, brother, lover, it's not my job.,And she says, "Pardon me, ma'am" -- that's how we talk down there --,"is that your mother?",I said, "No, I follow little old women around parking lots,to see if they'll stop. Yes, it's my mother!",The boy, now, he says. "Well, what my sister meant" --,they look at each other, it's a knowing glance -- "God, she's crazy!",I said, (Spanish), and the young girl and the young boy say,,"No, no, honey, we just want to know one more thing.",I said, "Look, please, let me take care of her, OK,,because I know her, and believe me, she's like a small atomic weapon,,you know, you just want to handle her really gingerly.",And the girl goes, "I know, but, I mean, I swear to God,,she reminds us of our mother.",I almost miss it.,He turns to her on the heel of his shoe.,It's a half-whisper, "God, I miss her.",They turn then, shoulder to shoulder, and walk away,,lost in their own reverie.,Memories of some maddening woman who was the luck of their DNA draw.,And I turn to Esther, who's rocking on those 'ports, and says,,"You know what, honey?","What, ma?","I'm going to drive you crazy probably for about 14, 15 more years,,if you're lucky, but after that, honey, you're going to miss me.",(Applause)Thank you very much.,Now, I've got a story for you.,When I arrived off the plane,,after a very long journey from the West of England,,my computer, my beloved laptop,,had gone mad,,and had -- oh! -- a bit like that! --,and the display on it --,anyway, the whole thing had burst.,And I went to the IT guys here,and a gentleman mended my computer,,and then he said, "What are you doing here?",and I said "I'm playing the cello and I'm doing a bit of singing,",and he said, "Oh, I sort of play the cello as well.",And I said, "Do you really?",Anyway, so you're in for a treat,,because he's fantastic, and his name's Mark. 
 (Applause) 
 I am also joined by my partner in crime, Thomas Dolby. 
 (Applause) 
 This song is called "Farther than the Sun." 
 (Music) 
  Strung in the wind I called you  
  but you did not hear ...  
  And you're a plant that needs poor soil  
  and I have treated you too well  
  to give up flowers ...  
  Oh, I have been too rich for you ...  
  Farther than the sun from me  
  Farther than I'd have you be  
  And I go north, I get so cold  
  My heart is lava under stone  
  You are not worthy  
  You are not worthy ...  
  With your calculating eyes  
  spinning figures  
  you cannot see me  
  You cannot see me ...  
  And if I tell myself enough  
  I'll believe it  
  You are not worthy  
  The sea, it freezes over ...  
  to trap the light  
  And I'm in love with being in love  
  and you were never quite the one  
  In Gerda's eyes  
  Fragments of what you've become  
  And all the moths that fly at night  
  believe electric light is bright  
  You are not worthy  
  You are not worthy  
  With your calculating eyes  
  Spinning figures  
  You cannot see me, no  
  And if I tell myself enough  
  I'll believe it  
  You are not worthy  
  Farther than the sun from me  
  Farther than I'd have you be  
  And I go north, I get so cold  
  My heart is lava under stone  
  You are not worthy  
  You are not worthy  
  With your calculating eyes  
  Spinning figures  
  You cannot see me, no ...  
  And if I tell myself enough, I'll believe it  
 (Applause) 
 Thank you very much.Nature's my muse and it's been my passion.,As a photographer for National Geographic, I've portrayed it for many.,But five years ago, I went on a personal journey.,I wanted to visualize the story of life.,It's the hardest thing I've ever attempted,,and there have been plenty of times when I felt like backing out.,But there were also revelations.,And one of those I'd like to share with you today. 
 I went down to a remote lagoon in Australia, hoping to see the Earth,the way it was three billion years ago,,back before the sky turned blue.,There's stromatolites down there --,the first living things to capture photosynthesis --,and it's the only place they still occur today.,Going down there was like entering a time capsule,,and I came out with a different sense of myself in time.,The oxygen exhaled by those stromatolites,is what we all breathe today. 
 Stromatolites are the heroes in my story.,I hope it's a story that has some resonance for our time.,It's a story about you and me, nature and science.,And with that said, I'd like to invite you for,a short, brief journey of life through time.,Our journey starts in space, where matter condenses into spheres over time ...,solidifying into surface, molded by fire.,The fire gave way, Earth emerged -- but this was an alien planet.,The moon was closer; things were different.,Heat from within made geysers erupt -- that is how the oceans were born.,Water froze around the poles and shaped the edges of the Earth.,Water is the key to life, but in frozen form, it is a latent force.,And when it vanishes, Earth becomes Mars. 
 But this planet is different -- it's roiling inside.,And where that energy touches water, something new emerges: life.,It arises around cracks in the Earth.,Mud and minerals become substrate; there are bacteria.,Learn to multiply, thickening in places ...,Growing living structures under an alien sky ...,Stromatolites were the first to exhale oxygen.,And they changed the atmosphere.,A breath that's fossilized now as iron. 
 Meteorites delivered chemistry, and perhaps membranes, too.,Life needs a membrane to contain itself,so it can replicate and mutate.,These are diatoms, single-celled phytoplankton,with skeletons of silicon ...,circuit boards of the future.,Shallow seas nurtured life early on, and that's where it morphed,into more complex forms.,It grew as light and oxygen increased.,Life hardened and became defensive.,It learned to move and began to see. The first eyes grew on trilobites.,Vision was refined in horseshoe crabs,,among the first to leave the sea.,They still do what they've done for ages, their enemies long gone. 
 Scorpions follow prey out of the sea. Slugs became snails.,Fish tried amphibian life. Frogs adapted to deserts.,Lichens arose as a co-op. Fungi married algae ...,clinging to rock, and eating it too ... transforming barren land.,True land plants arose, leafless at first.,Once they learn how to stay upright, they grew in size and shape.,The fundamental forms of ferns followed,,to bear spores that foreshadowed seeds.,Life flourished in swamps. 
 On land, life turned a corner. Jaws formed first; teeth came later.,Leatherbacks and tuataras are echoes from that era.,It took time for life to break away from water,,and it still beckons all the time.,Life turned hard so it could venture inland.,And the dragons that arose are still among us today.,Jurassic Park still shimmers in part of Madagascar,,and the center of Brazil,,where plants called "cycads" remain rock hard.,Forests arose and nurtured things with wings.,One early form left an imprint, like it died only yesterday.,And others fly today like echoes of the past.,In birds, life gained new mobility.,Flamingos covered continents. Migrations got underway. 
 Birds witnessed the emergence of flowering plants.,Water lilies were among the first.,Plants began to diversify and grew, turning into trees.,In Australia, a lily turned into a grass tree,,and in Hawaii, a daisy became a silver sword.,In Africa, Gondwana molded Proteas.,But when that ancient continent broke up, life got lusher.,Tropical rainforests arose, sparking new layers of interdependence.,Fungi multiplied. Orchids emerged, genitalia shaped to lure insects ...,a trick shared by the largest flower on Earth.,Co-evolution entwined insects and birds and plants forever.,When birds can't fly, they become vulnerable.,Kiwis are, and so are these hawks trapped near Antarctica. 
 Extinction can come slowly, but sometimes it arrives fast.,An asteroid hits, and the world went down in flames.,But there were witnesses, survivors in the dark.,When the skies cleared, a new world was born.,A world fit for mammals. From tiny shrews [came],tenrecs, accustomed to the dark.,New forms became bats. Civets.,New predators, hyenas, getting faster and faster still. 
 Grasslands created opportunities.,Herd safety came with sharpened senses.,Growing big was another answer, but size always comes at a price.,Some mammals turned back to water.,Walruses adapted with layers of fat. Sea lions got sleek.,And cetaceans moved into a world without bounds.,There are many ways to be a mammal. A 'roo hops in Oz;,a horse runs in Asia; and a wolf evolves stilt legs in Brazil.,Primates emerge from jungles, as tarsiers first,,becoming lemurs not much later.,Learning became reinforced. Bands of apes ventured into the open.,And forests dried out once more. Going upright became a lifestyle. 
 So who are we? Brothers of masculine chimps,,sisters of feminine bonobos? We are all of them, and more.,We're molded by the same life force.,The blood veins in our hands,echoed a course of water traces on the Earth.,And our brains -- our celebrated brains --,reflect a drainage of a tidal marsh. 
 Life is a force in its own right. It is a new element.,And it has altered the Earth. It covers Earth like a skin.,And where it doesn't, as in Greenland in winter,,Mars is still not very far.,But that likelihood fades as long as ice melts again.,And where water is liquid, it becomes a womb,for cells green with chlorophyll -- and that molecular marvel,is what's made a difference -- it powers everything.,The whole animal world today lives on a stockpile,of bacterial oxygen that is cycled constantly,through plants and algae, and their waste is our breath,,and vice versa.,This Earth is alive, and it's made its own membrane.,We call it "atmosphere." This is the icon of our journey.,And you all here today can imagine and will shape where we go next.,(Applause),Thank you. Thank you.What I thought I would talk about today,is the transition from one mode,of thinking about nature,to another that's tracked by architecture.,What's interesting about architects is,,we always have tried to justify beauty,by looking to nature,,and arguably, beautiful architecture,has always been looking at a model of nature. 
 So, for roughly 300 years,,the hot debate in architecture,was whether the number five,or the number seven,was a better proportion to think about architecture,,because the nose was one-fifth of your head,,or because your head was one-seventh of your body.,And the reason that that was the model,of beauty and of nature,was because the decimal point had not been invented yet --,it wasn't the 16th century --,and everybody had to dimension a building,in terms of fractions,,so a room would be dimensioned,as one-fourth of a facade;,the structural dais of that might be dimensioned as 10 units,,and you would get down to the small elements,by fractional subdivision:,finer and finer and finer. 
 In the 15th century, the decimal point was invented;,architects stopped using fractions,,and they had a new model of nature.,So, what's going on today,is that there's a model of natural form,which is calculus-based,and which is using digital tools,,and that has a lot of implications,to the way we think about beauty and form,,and it has a lot of implications in the way we think about nature.,The best example of this would probably be the Gothic,,and the Gothic was invented after the invention of calculus,,although the Gothic architects,weren't really using calculus to define their forms.,But what was important is,,the Gothic moment in architecture was the first time,that force and motion was thought of in terms of form. 
 So, examples like Christopher Wren's King's Cross:,you can see that the structural forces of the vaulting,get articulated as lines, so you're really actually seeing,the expression of structural force and form.,Much later, Robert Maillart's bridges,,which optimize structural form,with a calculus curvature almost like a parabola.,The Hanging Chain models of Antonio Gaudi,,the Catalan architect.,The end of the 19th century, beginning of the 20th century,,and how that Hanging Chain model,translates into archways,and vaulting.,So, in all of these examples,,structure is the determining force.,Frei Otto was starting to use foam bubble diagrams,and foam bubble models to generate his Mannheim Concert Hall.,Interestingly, in the last 10 years,Norman Foster used a similar heat thermal transfer model,to generate the roof of the National Gallery,,with the structural engineer Chris Williams. 
 In all these examples,,there's one ideal form,,because these are thought in terms of structure.,And as an architect, I've always found these kinds of systems,very limiting, because I'm not interested in ideal forms,and I'm not interested in optimizing to some perfect moment. 
 So, what I thought I would bring up is,another component that needs to be thought of,,whenever you think about nature,,and that's basically the invention of,generic form in genetic evolution.,My hero is actually not Darwin;,it's a guy named William Bateson,,father of Greg Bateson, who was here for a long time in Monterey.,And he was what you'd call a teratologist:,he looked at all of the monstrosities and mutations,to find rules and laws, rather than looking at the norms.,So, instead of trying to find the ideal type,or the ideal average,,he'd always look for the exception. So, in this example,,which is an example of what's called Bateson's Rule,,he has two kinds of mutations of a human thumb.,When I first saw this image, 10 years ago,,I actually found it very strange and beautiful at the same time.,Beautiful, because it has symmetry.,So, what he found is that in all cases of thumb mutations,,instead of having a thumb,,you would either get another opposable thumb,,or you would get four fingers.,So, the mutations reverted to symmetry.,And Bateson invented,the concept of symmetry breaking,,which is that,wherever you lose information in a system,,you revert back to symmetry.,So, symmetry wasn't the sign of order and organization --,which is what I was always understanding, and as is an architect --,symmetry was the absence of information.,So, whenever you lost information, you'd move to symmetry;,whenever you added information to a system, you would break symmetry.,So, this whole idea of natural form shifted at that moment,from looking for ideal shapes,to looking for a combination of,information and generic form. 
 You know, literally after seeing that image,,and finding out what Bateson was working with,,we started to use these rules for symmetry breaking and branching,to start to think about architectural form.,To just talk for a minute about the,digital mediums that we're using now,and how they integrate calculus:,the fact that they're calculus-based,means that we don't have to think about dimension,in terms of ideal units,or discreet elements. 
 So, in architecture we deal with,big assemblies of components,,so there might be up to, say,,50,000 pieces of material,in this room you're sitting in right now,that all need to get organized.,Now, typically you'd think that they would all be the same:,like, the chairs you're sitting in would all be the same dimension.,You know, I haven't verified this, but it's the norm,that every chair would be a slightly different dimension,,because you'd want to space them all out for everybody's sight lines.,The elements that make up the ceiling grid and the lighting,,they're all losing their modular quality,,and moving more and more to these infinitesimal dimensions.,That's because we're all using calculus tools,for manufacturing and for design. 
 Calculus is also a mathematics of curves.,So, even a straight line, defined with calculus, is a curve.,It's just a curve without inflection.,So, a new vocabulary of form,is now pervading all design fields:,whether it's automobiles, architecture, products, etc.,,it's really being affected by this digital medium of curvature.,The intricacies of scale that come out of that --,you know, in the example of the nose to the face,,there's a fractional part-to-whole idea.,With calculus, the whole idea,of subdivision is more complex,,because the whole and the parts are one continuous series.,It's too early in the morning for a lecture on calculus,,so I brought some images to just describe how that works. 
 This is a Korean church that we did in Queens.,And in this example, you can see,that the components of this stair are repetitive,,but they're repetitive without being modular.,Each one of the elements in this structure,is a unique distance and dimension,,and all of the connections are unique angles.,Now, the only way we could design that,,or possibly construct it,,is by using a calculus-based definition,of the form.,It also is much more dynamic,,so that you can see that the same form opens and closes,in a very dynamic way as you move across it,,because it has this quality of vector in motion,built into it.,So the same space that appears to be a kind of closed volume,,when seen from the other side becomes a kind of open vista.,And you also get a sense of,visual movement in the space,,because every one of the elements is changing in a pattern,,so that pattern leads your eye towards the altar.,I think that's one of the main changes,,also, in architecture:,that we're starting to look now not for some ideal form,,like a Latin cross for a church,,but actually all the traits of a church:,so, light that comes from behind from an invisible source,,directionality that focuses you towards an altar.,It turns out it's not rocket science,to design a sacred space.,You just need to incorporate a certain number of traits,in a very kind of genetic way.,So, these are the different perspectives of that interior,,which has a very complex,set of orientations all in a simple form. 
 In terms of construction and manufacturing,,this is a kilometer-long housing block,that was built in the '70s in Amsterdam.,And here we've broken the 500 apartments,up into small neighborhoods,,and differentiated those neighborhoods.,I won't go into too much description of any of these projects,,but what you can see is that,the escalators and elevators,that circulate people along the face of the building,are all held up by,122 structural trusses.,Because we're using escalators,to move people,,all of these trusses are picking up diagonal loads.,So, every one of them is a little bit different-shaped,as you move down the length of the building.,So, working with,Bentley and MicroStation,,we've written a custom piece of software,that networks all of the components together,into these chunks of information,,so that if we change any element,along the length of the building,,not only does that change distribute,through each one of the trusses,,but each one of the trusses then distributes that information,down the length of the entire facade of the building.,So it's a single calculation,for every single component of the building,that we're adding onto.,So, it's tens of millions of calculations,just to design one connection between a piece of structural steel,and another piece of structural steel.,But what it gives us is a harmonic,and synthesized,relationship of all these components, one to another. 
 This idea has, kind of, brought me into doing,some product design,,and it's because design firms,that have connections to architects,,like, I'm working with Vitra, which is a furniture company,,and Alessi, which is a houseware company.,They saw this actually solving a problem:,this ability to differentiate components,but keep them synthetic.,So, not to pick on BMW,,or to celebrate them,,but take BMW as an example.,They have to, in 2005,,have a distinct identity,for all their models of cars.,So, the 300 series, or whatever their newest car is,,the 100 series that's coming out,,has to look like the 700 series,,at the other end of their product line,,so they need a distinct, coherent identity,,which is BMW.,At the same time, there's a person paying 30,000 dollars,for a 300-series car,,and a person paying 70,000 dollars,for a 700 series,,and that person paying more than double,doesn't want their car to look too much like,the bottom-of-the-market car.,So they have to also discriminate between these products.,So, as manufacturing,starts to allow more,design options,,this problem gets exacerbated,,of the whole and the parts. 
 Now, as an architect, part-to-whole relationships,is all I think about,,but in terms of product design,it's becoming more and more of an issue for companies.,So, the first kind of test product we did,was with Alessi,,which was for a coffee and tea set.,It's an incredibly expensive coffee and tea set;,we knew that at the beginning. So, I actually went to some people I knew,down south in San Diego,,and we used an exploded,titanium forming method,that's used in the aerospace industry.,Basically what we can do,,is just cut a graphite mold,,put it in an oven, heat it to 1,000 degrees,,gently inflate titanium that's soft,,and then explode it at the last minute into this form.,But what's great about it is,,the forms are only a few hundred dollars.,The titanium's several thousand dollars, but the forms are very cheap.,So, we designed a system here,of eight curves that could be swapped,,very similar to that housing project I showed you,,and we could recombine those together,,so that we always had ergonomic shapes,that always had the same volume,and could always be produced in the same way.,That way, each one of these tools we could pay for with,a few hundred dollars,,and get incredible variation in the components.,And this is one of those examples of the sets.,So, for me, what was important is that,this coffee set --,which is just a coffee pot, a teapot,,and those are the pots sitting on a tray --,that they would have a coherence --,so, they would be Greg Lynn Alessi coffee pots --,but that everyone who bought one,would have a one-of-a-kind object that was unique in some way. 
 To go back to architecture,,what's organic about architecture as a field,,unlike product design,,is this whole issue of holism,and of monumentality is really our realm.,Like, we have to design things which are coherent as a single object,,but also break down into small rooms,and have an identity of both the big scale,and the small scale.,Architects tend to work with signature,,so that an architect needs a signature,and that signature has to work across the scale of houses,up to, say, skyscrapers,,and that problem of signatures is a thing we're very good at maintaining,and working with; and intricacy,,which is the relationship of, say,,the shape of a building, its structure, its windows,,its color, its pattern. These are real architectural problems. 
 So, my kind of hero for this in the natural world,are these tropical frogs.,I got interested in them because they're the most,extreme example,of a surface where,the texture and the -- let's call it the decoration --,I know the frog doesn't think of it as decoration, but that's how it works --,are all intricately connected to one another.,So a change in the form,indicates a change in the color pattern.,So, the pattern and the form aren't the same thing,,but they really work together and are fused,in some way.,So, when doing a center,for the national parks in Costa Rica,,we tried to use that idea of a gradient color,and a change in texture,as the structure moves across the surface of the building.,We also used a continuity of change,from a main exhibition hall to a natural history museum,,so it's all one continuous change,in the massing,,but within that massing are very different kinds of spaces and forms. 
 In a housing project in Valencia, Spain, we're doing,,the different towers of housing fused together,in shared curves so you get a single mass,,like a kind of monolith,,but it breaks down into individual elements.,And you can see that that change in massing,also gives all 48 of the apartments,a unique shape and size,,but always within a, kind of, controlled limit,,an envelope of change. 
 I work with a group of other architects.,We have a company called United Architects.,We were one of the finalists for the World Trade Center site design.,And I think this just shows how,we were approaching,the problem of incredibly large-scale construction.,We wanted to make a kind of Gothic cathedral,around the footprints of the World Trade Center site.,And to do that, we tried to connect up,the five towers into a single system.,And we looked at, from the 1950s on,,there were numerous examples of other architects,trying to do the same thing.,We really approached it at the level,of the typology of the building,,where we could build these five separate towers,,but they would all join at the 60th floor,and make a kind of single monolithic mass.,With United Architects, also,,we made a proposal for the European Central Bank headquarters,that used the same system,,but this time in a much more monolithic mass,,like a sphere.,But again, you can see this, kind of,,organic fusion,of multiple building elements,to make a thing which is whole, but breaks down into smaller parts,,but in an incredibly organic way. 
 Finally, I'd like to just show you,some of the effects of using digital fabrication.,About six years ago, I bought one of these CNC mills,,to just replace, kind of,,young people cutting their fingers off all the time building models.,And I also bought a laser cutter,and started to fabricate within my own shop,,kind of, large-scale building elements and models,,where we could go directly to the tooling.,What I found out is that the tooling,,if you intervened in the software,,actually produced decorative effects.,So, for these interiors, like this shop in Stockholm, Sweden,,or this installation wall in the Netherlands,at the Netherlands Architecture Institute,,we could use the texture that the tool would leave,to produce a lot of the spatial effects,,and we could integrate the texture of the wall,with the form of the wall with the material.,So, in vacuum-formed plastic, in fiberglass,,and then even at the level of structural steel,,which you think of as being linear and modular.,The steel industry is so far,ahead of the design industry,that if you take advantage of it,you can even start to think of beams and columns,all rolled together into a single system,which is highly efficient,,but also produces decorative effects,and formal effects,that are very beautiful and organic.,Thanks very much.I'm here to enlist you,in helping reshape the story about how humans and other critters get things done.,Here is the old story -- we've already heard a little bit about it:,biology is war in which only the fiercest survive;,businesses and nations succeed only by defeating,,destroying and dominating competition; 
 politics is about your side winning at all costs.,But I think we can see the very beginnings of a new story beginning to emerge.,It's a narrative spread across a number of different disciplines,,in which cooperation, collective action and complex interdependencies,play a more important role.,And the central, but not all-important, role of competition and survival of the fittest,shrinks just a little bit to make room. 
 I started thinking about the relationship between communication, media,and collective action when I wrote "Smart Mobs,",and I found that when I finished the book, I kept thinking about it.,In fact, if you look back, human communication media,and the ways in which we organize socially have been co-evolving for quite a long time.,Humans have lived for much, much longer,than the approximately 10,000 years of settled agricultural civilization 
 in small family groups. Nomadic hunters bring down rabbits, gathering food.,The form of wealth in those days was enough food to stay alive.,But at some point, they banded together to hunt bigger game.,And we don't know exactly how they did this,,although they must have solved some collective action problems;,it only makes sense that you can't hunt mastodons,while you're fighting with the other groups. 
 And again, we have no way of knowing,,but it's clear that a new form of wealth must have emerged.,More protein than a hunter's family could eat before it rotted.,So that raised a social question,that I believe must have driven new social forms.,Did the people who ate that mastodon meat owe something,to the hunters and their families?,And if so, how did they make arrangements?,Again, we can't know, but we can be pretty sure that some form of,symbolic communication must have been involved. 
 Of course, with agriculture came the first big civilizations,,the first cities built of mud and brick, the first empires.,And it was the administers of these empires,who began hiring people to keep track of the wheat and sheep and wine that was owed,and the taxes that was owed on them,by making marks; marks on clay in that time. 
 Not too much longer after that, the alphabet was invented.,And this powerful tool was really reserved, for thousands of years,,for the elite administrators (Laughter) who kept track of accounts for the empires.,And then another communication technology enabled new media:,the printing press came along, and within decades,,millions of people became literate.,And from literate populations,,new forms of collective action emerged in the spheres of knowledge,,religion and politics.,We saw scientific revolutions, the Protestant Reformation,,constitutional democracies possible where they had not been possible before.,Not created by the printing press,,but enabled by the collective action that emerges from literacy.,And again, new forms of wealth emerged. 
 Now, commerce is ancient. Markets are as old as the crossroads.,But capitalism, as we know it, is only a few hundred years old,,enabled by cooperative arrangements and technologies,,such as the joint-stock ownership company,,shared liability insurance, double-entry bookkeeping. 
 Now of course, the enabling technologies are based on the Internet,,and in the many-to-many era, every desktop is now a printing press,,a broadcasting station, a community or a marketplace.,Evolution is speeding up.,More recently, that power is untethering and leaping off the desktops,,and very, very quickly, we're going to see a significant proportion, if not the majority of,the human race, walking around holding, carrying or wearing supercomputers,linked at speeds greater,than what we consider to be broadband today. 
 Now, when I started looking into collective action,,the considerable literature on it is based on what sociologists call "social dilemmas.",And there are a couple of mythic narratives of social dilemmas.,I'm going to talk briefly about two of them:,the prisoner's dilemma and the tragedy of the commons. 
 Now, when I talked about this with Kevin Kelly,,he assured me that everybody in this audience pretty much knows the details,of the prisoner's dilemma,,so I'm just going to go over that very, very quickly.,If you have more questions about it, ask Kevin Kelly later. (Laughter) 
 The prisoner's dilemma is actually a story that's overlaid,on a mathematical matrix that came out of the game theory,in the early years of thinking about nuclear war:,two players who couldn't trust each other.,Let me just say that every unsecured transaction,is a good example of a prisoner's dilemma.,Person with the goods, person with the money,,because they can't trust each other, are not going to exchange.,Neither one wants to be the first one,or they're going to get the sucker's payoff,,but both lose, of course, because they don't get what they want.,If they could only agree, if they could only turn a prisoner's dilemma into,a different payoff matrix called an assurance game, they could proceed. 
 Twenty years ago, Robert Axelrod used the prisoner's dilemma,as a probe of the biological question:,if we are here because our ancestors were such fierce competitors,,how does cooperation exist at all?,He started a computer tournament for,people to submit prisoner's dilemma strategies and discovered,,much to his surprise, that a very, very simple strategy won --,it won the first tournament, and even after everyone knew it won,,it won the second tournament -- that's known as tit for tat. 
 Another economic game that may not be as well known as the prisoner's dilemma,is the ultimatum game,,and it's also a very interesting probe of,our assumptions about the way people make economic transactions.,Here's how the game is played: there are two players;,they've never played the game before,,they will not play the game again, they don't know each other,,and they are, in fact, in separate rooms.,First player is offered a hundred dollars,and is asked to propose a split: 50/50, 90/10,,whatever that player wants to propose. The second player either accepts the split --,both players are paid and the game is over --,or rejects the split -- neither player is paid and the game is over. 
 Now, the fundamental basis of neoclassical economics,would tell you it's irrational to reject a dollar,because someone you don't know in another room is going to get 99.,Yet in thousands of trials with American and European and Japanese students,,a significant percentage would reject any offer that's not close to 50/50.,And although they were screened and didn't know about the game,and had never played the game before,,proposers seemed to innately know this,because the average proposal was surprisingly close to 50/50. 
 Now, the interesting part comes in more recently,when anthropologists began taking this game to other cultures,and discovered, to their surprise,,that slash-and-burn agriculturalists in the Amazon,or nomadic pastoralists in Central Asia or a dozen different cultures --,each had radically different ideas of what is fair.,Which suggests that instead of there being an innate sense of fairness,,that somehow the basis of our economic,transactions can be influenced by our social institutions,,whether we know that or not. 
 The other major narrative of social dilemmas is the tragedy of the commons.,Garrett Hardin used it to talk about overpopulation in the late 1960s.,He used the example of a common grazing area in which each person,by simply maximizing their own flock,led to overgrazing and the depletion of the resource.,He had the rather gloomy conclusion that,humans will inevitably despoil any common pool resource,in which people cannot be restrained from using it. 
 Now, Elinor Ostrom, a political scientist, in,1990 asked the interesting question that any good scientist should ask,,which is: is it really true that humans will always despoil commons?,So she went out and looked at what data she could find.,She looked at thousands of cases of humans sharing watersheds,,forestry resources, fisheries, and discovered that yes, in case after case,,humans destroyed the commons that they depended on.,But she also found many instances in which people escaped the prisoner's dilemma;,in fact, the tragedy of the commons is a multiplayer prisoner's dilemma.,And she said that people are only prisoners if they consider themselves to be.,They escape by creating institutions for collective action.,And she discovered, I think most interestingly,,that among those institutions that worked,,there were a number of common design,principles, and those principles seem to be,missing from those institutions that don't work. 
 I'm moving very quickly over a number of,disciplines. In biology, the notions of symbiosis,,group selection, evolutionary psychology are contested, to be sure.,But there is really no longer any major debate over the fact that,cooperative arrangements have moved from a peripheral role to a central role,in biology, from the level of the cell to the level of the ecology.,And again, our notions of individuals as economic beings,have been overturned.,Rational self-interest is not always the dominating factor.,In fact, people will act to punish cheaters, even at a cost to themselves. 
 And most recently, neurophysiological measures,have shown that people who punish cheaters in economic games,show activity in the reward centers of their brain.,Which led one scientist to declare that altruistic punishment,may be the glue that holds societies together. 
 Now, I've been talking about how new forms of communication and new media,in the past have helped create new economic forms.,Commerce is ancient. Markets are very old. Capitalism is fairly recent;,socialism emerged as a reaction to that.,And yet we see very little talk about how the next form may be emerging.,Jim Surowiecki briefly mentioned Yochai Benkler's paper about open source,,pointing to a new form of production: peer-to-peer production.,I simply want you to keep in mind that if in the past, new forms of cooperation,enabled by new technologies create new forms of wealth,,we may be moving into yet another economic form,that is significantly different from previous ones. 
 Very briefly, let's look at some businesses. IBM, as you know, HP, Sun --,some of the most fierce competitors in the IT world are open sourcing,their software, are providing portfolios of patents for the commons.,Eli Lilly -- in, again, the fiercely competitive pharmaceutical world --,has created a market for solutions for pharmaceutical problems.,Toyota, instead of treating its suppliers as a marketplace,,treats them as a network and trains them to produce better,,even though they are also training them to produce better for their competitors.,Now none of these companies are doing this out of altruism;,they're doing it because they're learning that,a certain kind of sharing is in their self-interest. 
 Open source production has shown us that world-class software, like Linux and Mozilla,,can be created with neither the bureaucratic structure of the firm,nor the incentives of the marketplace as we've known them.,Google enriches itself by enriching thousands of bloggers through AdSense.,Amazon has opened its Application Programming Interface,to 60,000 developers, countless Amazon shops.,They're enriching others, not out of altruism but as a way of enriching themselves.,eBay solved the prisoner's dilemma and created a market,where none would have existed by creating a feedback mechanism,that turns a prisoner's dilemma game into an assurance game. 
 Instead of, "Neither of us can trust each other, so we have to make suboptimal moves,",it's, "You prove to me that you are trustworthy and I will cooperate.",Wikipedia has used thousands of volunteers to create a free encyclopedia,with a million and a half articles in 200 languages in just a couple of years. 
 We've seen that ThinkCycle has enabled NGOs in developing countries,to put up problems to be solved by design students around the world,,including something that's being used for tsunami relief right now:,it's a mechanism for rehydrating,cholera victims that's so simple to use it,,illiterates can be trained to use it.,BitTorrent turns every downloader into an uploader,,making the system more efficient the more it is used. 
 Millions of people have contributed their desktop computers,when they're not using them to link together through the Internet,into supercomputing collectives,that help solve the protein folding problem for medical researchers --,that's Folding@home at Stanford --,to crack codes, to search for life in outer space. 
 I don't think we know enough yet.,I don't think we've even begun to discover what the basic principles are,,but I think we can begin to think about them.,And I don't have enough time to talk about all of them,,but think about self-interest.,This is all about self-interest that adds up to more.,In El Salvador, both sides that withdrew from their civil war,took moves that had been proven to mirror a prisoner's dilemma strategy. 
 In the U.S., in the Philippines, in Kenya, around the world,,citizens have self-organized political protests and,get out the vote campaigns using mobile devices and SMS.,Is an Apollo Project of cooperation possible?,A transdisciplinary study of cooperation?,I believe that the payoff would be very big.,I think we need to begin developing maps of this territory,so that we can talk about it across disciplines.,And I am not saying that understanding cooperation,is going to cause us to be better people --,and sometimes people cooperate to do bad things --,but I will remind you that a few hundred years ago,,people saw their loved ones die from diseases they thought,were caused by sin or foreigners or evil spirits. 
 Descartes said we need an entire new way of thinking.,When the scientific method provided that new way of thinking,and biology showed that microorganisms caused disease,,suffering was alleviated.,What forms of suffering could be alleviated,,what forms of wealth could be created,if we knew a little bit more about cooperation?,I don't think that this transdisciplinary discourse,is automatically going to happen;,it's going to require effort.,So I enlist you to help me get the cooperation project started.,Thank you.,(Applause)This was in an area called Wellawatta, a prime residential area in Colombo.,We stood on the railroad tracks,that ran between my friend's house and the beach.,The tracks are elevated about eight feet from the waterline normally,,but at that point the water had receded,to a level three or four feet below normal.,I'd never seen the reef here before.,There were fish caught in rock pools left behind by the receding water.,Some children jumped down and ran to the rock pools with bags.,They were trying to catch fish.,No one realized that this was a very bad idea.,The people on the tracks just continued to watch them.,I turned around to check on my friend's house.,Then someone on the tracks screamed.,Before I could turn around, everyone on the tracks was screaming and running. 
 The water had started coming back. It was foaming over the reef.,The children managed to run back onto the tracks.,No one was lost there. But the water continued to climb.,In about two minutes, it had reached the level of the railroad tracks,and was coming over it. We had run about 100 meters by this time.,It continued to rise.,I saw an old man standing at his gate, knee-deep in water, refusing to move.,He said he'd lived his whole life there by the beach,,and that he would rather die there than run.,A boy broke away from his mother to run back into his house,to get his dog, who was apparently afraid.,An old lady, crying, was carried out of her house and up the road by her son.,The slum built on the railroad reservation,between the sea and the railroad tracks was completely swept away.,Since this was a high-risk location, the police had warned the residents,,and no one was there when the water rose.,But they had not had any time to evacuate any belongings.,For hours afterwards, the sea was strewn with bits of wood for miles around --,all of this was from the houses in the slum.,When the waters subsided, it was as if it had never existed. 
 This may seem hard to believe --,unless you've been reading lots and lots of news reports --,but in many places, after the tsunami, villagers were still terrified.,When what was a tranquil sea swallows up people, homes,and long-tail boats -- mercilessly, without warning --,and no one can tell you anything reliable about whether another one is coming,,I'm not sure you'd want to calm down either.,One of the scariest things about the tsunami,that I've not seen mentioned is the complete lack of information.,This may seem minor, but it is terrifying to hear rumor after rumor,after rumor that another tidal wave, bigger than the last,,will be coming at exactly 1 p.m., or perhaps tonight, or perhaps ...,You don't even know if it is safe to go back down to the water,,to catch a boat to the hospital.,We think that Phi Phi hospital was destroyed.,We think this boat is going to Phuket hospital,,but if it's too dangerous to land at its pier,,then perhaps it will go to Krabi instead, which is more protected.,We don't think another wave is coming right away. 
 At the Phi Phi Hill Resort,,I was tucked into the corner furthest away from the television,,but I strained to listen for information.,They reported that there was an 8.5 magnitude earthquake in Sumatra,,which triggered the massive tsunami.,Having this news was comforting in some small way,to understand what had just happened to us.,However, the report focused on what had already occurred,and offered no information on what to expect now.,In general, everything was merely hearsay and rumor,,and not a single person I spoke to for over 36 hours,knew anything with any certainty.,Those were two accounts of the Asian tsunami from two Internet blogs,that essentially sprang up after it occurred.,I'm now going to show you two video segments from the tsunami,that also were shown on blogs.,I should warn you, they're pretty powerful.,One from Thailand, and the second one from Phuket as well. 
 (Screaming) 
 Voice 1: It's coming in. It's coming again. 
 Voice 2: It's coming again? 
 Voice 1: Yeah. It's coming again. 
 Voice 2: Come get inside here. 
 Voice 1: It's coming again. Voice 2: New wave?,Voice 1: It's coming again. New wave!,[Unclear] 
 (Screaming) 
 They called me out here. 
 James Surowiecki: Phew. Those were both on this site: waveofdestruction.org.,In the world of blogs, there's going to be before the tsunami and after the tsunami,,because one of the things that happened in the wake of the tsunami was that,,although initially -- that is, in that first day --,there was actually a kind of dearth of live reporting, there was a dearth of live video,and some people complained about this.,They said, "The blogsters let us down.",What became very clear was that,,within a few days, the outpouring of information was immense,,and we got a complete and powerful picture of what had happened,in a way that we never had been able to get before.,And what you had was a group of essentially unorganized, unconnected,writers, video bloggers, etc., who were able to come up with,a collective portrait of a disaster that gave us a much better sense,of what it was like to actually be there than the mainstream media could give us. 
 And so in some ways the tsunami can be seen as a sort of seminal moment,,a moment in which the blogosphere came, to a certain degree, of age.,Now, I'm going to move now from this kind of --,the sublime in the traditional sense of the word,,that is to say, awe-inspiring, terrifying -- to the somewhat more mundane.,Because when we think about blogs,,I think for most of us who are concerned about them,,we're primarily concerned with things like politics, technology, etc.,And I want to ask three questions in this talk,,in the 10 minutes that remain, about the blogosphere.,The first one is, What does it tell us about our ideas,,about what motivates people to do things?,The second is, Do blogs genuinely have the possibility,of accessing a kind of collective intelligence,that has previously remained, for the most part, untapped?,And then the third part is, What are the potential problems,,or the dark side of blogs as we know them? 
 OK, the first question:,What do they tell us about why people do things?,One of the fascinating things about the blogosphere specifically,,and, of course, the Internet more generally --,and it's going to seem like a very obvious point,,but I think it is an important one to think about --,is that the people who are generating these enormous reams of content,every day, who are spending enormous amounts of time organizing,,linking, commenting on the substance of the Internet,,are doing so primarily for free.,They are not getting paid for it in any way other than in the attention and,,to some extent, the reputational capital that they gain from doing a good job.,And this is -- at least, to a traditional economist -- somewhat remarkable,,because the traditional account of economic man would say that,,basically, you do things for a concrete reward, primarily financial.,But instead, what we're finding on the Internet --,and one of the great geniuses of it -- is that people have found a way,to work together without any money involved at all.,They have come up with, in a sense, a different method for organizing activity. 
 The Yale Law professor Yochai Benkler, in an essay called "Coase's Penguin,",talks about this open-source model, which we're familiar with from Linux,,as being potentially applicable in a whole host of situations.,And, you know, if you think about this with the tsunami,,what you have is essentially a kind of an army of local journalists,,who are producing enormous amounts of material,for no reason other than to tell their stories.,That's a very powerful idea, and it's a very powerful reality.,And it's one that offers really interesting possibilities,for organizing a whole host of activities down the road. 
 So, I think the first thing that the blogosphere tells us,is that we need to expand our idea of what counts as rational,,and we need to expand our simple equation of value equals money,,or, you have to pay for it to be good,,but that in fact you can end up with collectively really brilliant products,without any money at all changing hands.,There are a few bloggers -- somewhere maybe around 20, now --,who do, in fact, make some kind of money, and a few,who are actually trying to make a full-time living out of it,,but the vast majority of them are doing it because they love it,or they love the attention, or whatever it is.,So, Howard Rheingold has written a lot about this,and, I think, is writing about this more,,but this notion of voluntary cooperation,is an incredibly powerful one, and one worth thinking about. 
 The second question is, What does the blogosphere actually do for us,,in terms of accessing collective intelligence?,You know, as Chris mentioned, I wrote a book called "The Wisdom of Crowds.",And the premise of "The Wisdom of Crowds" is that,,under the right conditions, groups can be remarkably intelligent.,And they can actually often be smarter,than even the smartest person within them.,The simplest example of this is if you ask a group of people,to do something like guess how many jellybeans are in a jar.,If I had a jar of jellybeans,and I asked you all to guess how many jellybeans were in that jar,,your average guess would be remarkably good.,It would be somewhere probably within three and five percent,of the number of beans in the jar,,and it would be better than 90 to 95 percent of you.,There may be one or two of you who are brilliant jelly bean guessers,,but for the most part the group's guess,would be better than just about all of you.,And what's fascinating is that you can see this phenomenon at work,in many more complicated situations. 
 For instance, if you look at the odds on horses at a racetrack,,they predict almost perfectly how likely a horse is to win.,In a sense, the group of betters at the racetrack,is forecasting the future, in probabilistic terms.,You know, if you think about something like Google,,which essentially is relying on the collective intelligence of the Web,to seek out those sites that have the most valuable information --,we know that Google does an exceptionally good job of doing that,,and it does that because, collectively, this disorganized thing,we call the "World Wide Web" actually has a remarkable order,,or a remarkable intelligence in it.,And this, I think, is one of the real promises of the blogosphere. 
 Dan Gillmor -- whose book "We the Media",is included in the gift pack --,has talked about it as saying that, as a writer,,he's recognized that his readers know more than he does.,And this is a very challenging idea. It's a very challenging idea,to mainstream media. It's a very challenging idea to anyone,who has invested an enormous amount of time and expertise,,and who has a lot of energy invested in the notion,that he or she knows better than everyone else.,But what the blogosphere offers is the possibility,of getting at the kind of collective, distributive intelligence that is out there,,and that we know is available to us,if we can just figure out a way of accessing it.,Each blog post, each blog commentary,may not, in and of itself, be exactly what we're looking for,,but collectively the judgment of those people posting, those people linking,,more often than not is going to give you a very interesting,and enormously valuable picture of what's going on.,So, that's the positive side of it.,That's the positive side of what is sometimes called,participatory journalism or citizen journalism, etc. --,that, in fact, we are giving people,who have never been able to talk before a voice,,and we're able to access information that has always been there,but has essentially gone untapped. 
 But there is a dark side to this,,and that's what I want to spend the last part of my talk on.,One of the things that happens if you spend a lot of time on the Internet,,and you spend a lot of time thinking about the Internet,,is that it is very easy to fall in love with the Internet.,It is very easy to fall in love with the decentralized,,bottom-up structure of the Internet.,It is very easy to think that networks are necessarily good things --,that being linked from one place to another,,that being tightly linked in a group, is a very good thing.,And much of the time it is.,But there's also a downside to this -- a kind of dark side, in fact --,and that is that the more tightly linked we've become to each other,,the harder it is for each of us to remain independent. 
 One of the fundamental characteristics of a network is that,,once you are linked in the network,,the network starts to shape your views,and starts to shape your interactions with everybody else.,That's one of the things that defines what a network is.,A network is not just the product of its component parts.,It is something more than that.,It is, as Steven Johnson has talked about, an emergent phenomenon.,Now, this has all these benefits:,it's very beneficial in terms of the efficiency of communicating information;,it gives you access to a whole host of people;,it allows people to coordinate their activities in very good ways.,But the problem is that groups are only smart,when the people in them are as independent as possible.,This is the paradox of the wisdom of crowds,,or the paradox of collective intelligence,,that what it requires is actually a form of independent thinking.,And networks make it harder for people to do that,,because they drive attention to the things that the network values. 
 So, one of the phenomena that's very clear in the blogosphere,is that once a meme, once an idea gets going,,it is very easy for people to just sort of pile on,,because other people have, say, a link.,People have linked to it, and so other people in turn link to it, etc., etc.,And that phenomenon,of piling on the existing links,is one that is characteristic of the blogosphere,,particularly of the political blogosphere,,and it is one that essentially throws off,this beautiful, decentralized, bottom-up intelligence,that blogs can manifest in the right conditions. 
 The metaphor that I like to use is the metaphor of the circular mill.,A lot of people talk about ants.,You know, this is a conference inspired by nature.,When we talk about bottom-up, decentralized phenomena,,the ant colony is the classic metaphor, because,,no individual ant knows what it's doing,,but collectively ants are able to reach incredibly intelligent decisions.,They're able to reach foodnas efficiently as possible,,they're able to guide their trafficnwith remarkable speed.,So, the ant colony is a great model:,you have all these little parts that collectively add up to a great thing.,But we know that occasionally ants go astray,,and what happens is that, if army ants are wandering around and they get lost,,they start to follow a simple rule --,just do what the ant in front of you does.,And what happens is that the ants eventually end up in a circle.,And there's this famous example of one that was 1,200 feet long,and lasted for two days, and the ants just kept marching around and around,in a circle until they died.,And that, I think, is a sort of thing to watch out for.,That's the thing we have to fear --,is that we're just going to keep marching around and around until we die. 
 Now, I want to connect this back, though, to the tsunami,,because one of the great things about the tsunami --,in terms of the blogosphere's coverage,,not in terms of the tsunami itself --,is that it really did represent a genuine bottom-up phenomenon.,You saw sites that had never existed before getting huge amounts of traffic.,You saw people being able to offer upntheir independent points of view,in a way that they hadn't before.,There, you really did see the intelligence of the Web manifest itself.,So, that's the upside. The circular mill is the downside.,And I think that the former is what we really need to strive for. 
 Thank you very much. (Applause)Well, I thought there would be a podium, so I'm a bit scared.,(Laughter),Chris asked me to tell again how we found the structure of DNA.,And since, you know, I follow his orders, I'll do it.,But it slightly bores me.,(Laughter),And, you know, I wrote a book. So I'll say something --,(Laughter),-- I'll say a little about, you know, how the discovery was made,,and why Francis and I found it.,And then, I hope maybe I have at least five minutes to say,what makes me tick now. 
 In back of me is a picture of me when I was 17.,I was at the University of Chicago, in my third year,,and I was in my third year because the University of Chicago,let you in after two years of high school.,So you -- it was fun to get away from high school -- (Laughter) --,because I was very small, and I was no good in sports,,or anything like that. 
 But I should say that my background -- my father was, you know,,raised to be an Episcopalian and Republican,,but after one year of college, he became an atheist and a Democrat.,(Laughter),And my mother was Irish Catholic,,and -- but she didn't take religion too seriously.,And by the age of 11, I was no longer going to Sunday Mass,,and going on birdwatching walks with my father.,So early on, I heard of Charles Darwin.,I guess, you know, he was the big hero.,And, you know, you understand life as it now exists through evolution. 
 And at the University of Chicago I was a zoology major,,and thought I would end up, you know, if I was bright enough,,maybe getting a Ph.D. from Cornell in ornithology.,Then, in the Chicago paper, there was a review of a book,called "What is Life?" by the great physicist, Schrodinger.,And that, of course, had been a question I wanted to know.,You know, Darwin explained life after it got started,,but what was the essence of life? 
 And Schrodinger said the essence was information,present in our chromosomes, and it had to be present,on a molecule. I'd never really thought of molecules before.,You know chromosomes, but this was a molecule,,and somehow all the information was probably present,in some digital form. And there was the big question,of, how did you copy the information? 
 So that was the book. And so, from that moment on,,I wanted to be a geneticist --,understand the gene and, through that, understand life.,So I had, you know, a hero at a distance.,It wasn't a baseball player; it was Linus Pauling.,And so I applied to Caltech and they turned me down.,(Laughter),So I went to Indiana,,which was actually as good as Caltech in genetics,,and besides, they had a really good basketball team. (Laughter),So I had a really quite happy life at Indiana.,And it was at Indiana I got the impression,that, you know, the gene was likely to be DNA.,And so when I got my Ph.D., I should go and search for DNA. 
 So I first went to Copenhagen because I thought, well,,maybe I could become a biochemist,,but I discovered biochemistry was very boring.,It wasn't going anywhere toward, you know, saying what the gene was;,it was just nuclear science. And oh, that's the book, little book.,You can read it in about two hours.,And -- but then I went to a meeting in Italy.,And there was an unexpected speaker who wasn't on the program,,and he talked about DNA.,And this was Maurice Wilkins. He was trained as a physicist,,and after the war he wanted to do biophysics, and he picked DNA,because DNA had been determined at the Rockefeller Institute,to possibly be the genetic molecules on the chromosomes.,Most people believed it was proteins.,But Wilkins, you know, thought DNA was the best bet,,and he showed this x-ray photograph.,Sort of crystalline. So DNA had a structure,,even though it owed it to probably different molecules,carrying different sets of instructions.,So there was something universal about the DNA molecule.,So I wanted to work with him, but he didn't want a former birdwatcher,,and I ended up in Cambridge, England. 
 So I went to Cambridge,,because it was really the best place in the world then,for x-ray crystallography. And x-ray crystallography is now a subject,in, you know, chemistry departments.,I mean, in those days it was the domain of the physicists.,So the best place for x-ray crystallography,was at the Cavendish Laboratory at Cambridge.,And there I met Francis Crick.,I went there without knowing him. He was 35. I was 23.,And within a day, we had decided that,maybe we could take a shortcut to finding the structure of DNA.,Not solve it like, you know, in rigorous fashion, but build a model,,an electro-model, using some coordinates of, you know,,length, all that sort of stuff from x-ray photographs.,But just ask what the molecule -- how should it fold up? 
 And the reason for doing so, at the center of this photograph,,is Linus Pauling. About six months before, he proposed,the alpha helical structure for proteins. And in doing so,,he banished the man out on the right,,Sir Lawrence Bragg, who was the Cavendish professor.,This is a photograph several years later,,when Bragg had cause to smile.,He certainly wasn't smiling when I got there,,because he was somewhat humiliated by Pauling getting the alpha helix,,and the Cambridge people failing because they weren't chemists.,And certainly, neither Crick or I were chemists,,so we tried to build a model. And he knew, Francis knew Wilkins.,So Wilkins said he thought it was the helix.,X-ray diagram, he thought was comparable with the helix. 
 So we built a three-stranded model.,The people from London came up.,Wilkins and this collaborator, or possible collaborator,,Rosalind Franklin, came up and sort of laughed at our model.,They said it was lousy, and it was.,So we were told to build no more models; we were incompetent.,(Laughter),And so we didn't build any models,,and Francis sort of continued to work on proteins.,And basically, I did nothing. And -- except read.,You know, basically, reading is a good thing; you get facts.,And we kept telling the people in London,that Linus Pauling's going to move on to DNA.,If DNA is that important, Linus will know it.,He'll build a model, and then we're going to be scooped. 
 And, in fact, he'd written the people in London:,Could he see their x-ray photograph?,And they had the wisdom to say "no." So he didn't have it.,But there was ones in the literature.,Actually, Linus didn't look at them that carefully.,But about, oh, 15 months after I got to Cambridge,,a rumor began to appear from Linus Pauling's son,,who was in Cambridge, that his father was now working on DNA.,And so, one day Peter came in and he said he was Peter Pauling,,and he gave me a copy of his father's manuscripts.,And boy, I was scared because I thought, you know, we may be scooped.,I have nothing to do, no qualifications for anything.,(Laughter) 
 And so there was the paper, and he proposed a three-stranded structure.,And I read it, and it was just -- it was crap.,(Laughter),So this was, you know, unexpected from the world's --,(Laughter),-- and so, it was held together by hydrogen bonds,between phosphate groups.,Well, if the peak pH that cells have is around seven,,those hydrogen bonds couldn't exist.,We rushed over to the chemistry department and said,,"Could Pauling be right?" And Alex Hust said, "No." So we were happy.,(Laughter) 
 And, you know, we were still in the game, but we were frightened,that somebody at Caltech would tell Linus that he was wrong.,And so Bragg said, "Build models.",And a month after we got the Pauling manuscript --,I should say I took the manuscript to London, and showed the people.,Well, I said, Linus was wrong and that we're still in the game,and that they should immediately start building models.,But Wilkins said "no." Rosalind Franklin was leaving in about two months,,and after she left he would start building models.,And so I came back with that news to Cambridge,,and Bragg said, "Build models.",Well, of course, I wanted to build models.,And there's a picture of Rosalind. She really, you know,,in one sense she was a chemist,,but really she would have been trained --,she didn't know any organic chemistry or quantum chemistry.,She was a crystallographer. 
 And I think part of the reason she didn't want to build models,was, she wasn't a chemist, whereas Pauling was a chemist.,And so Crick and I, you know, started building models,,and I'd learned a little chemistry, but not enough.,Well, we got the answer on the 28th February '53.,And it was because of a rule, which, to me, is a very good rule:,Never be the brightest person in a room, and we weren't.,We weren't the best chemists in the room.,I went in and showed them a pairing I'd done,,and Jerry Donohue -- he was a chemist -- he said, it's wrong.,You've got -- the hydrogen atoms are in the wrong place.,I just put them down like they were in the books.,He said they were wrong. 
 So the next day, you know, after I thought, "Well, he might be right.",So I changed the locations, and then we found the base pairing,,and Francis immediately said the chains run in absolute directions.,And we knew we were right.,So it was a pretty, you know, it all happened in about two hours.,From nothing to thing.,And we knew it was big because, you know, if you just put A next to T,and G next to C, you have a copying mechanism.,So we saw how genetic information is carried.,It's the order of the four bases.,So in a sense, it is a sort of digital-type information.,And you copy it by going from strand-separating.,So, you know, if it didn't work this way, you might as well believe it,,because you didn't have any other scheme.,(Laughter) 
 But that's not the way most scientists think.,Most scientists are really rather dull.,They said, we won't think about it until we know it's right.,But, you know, we thought, well, it's at least 95 percent right or 99 percent right.,So think about it. The next five years,,there were essentially something like five references,to our work in "Nature" -- none.,And so we were left by ourselves,,and trying to do the last part of the trio: how do you --,what does this genetic information do?,It was pretty obvious that it provided the information,to an RNA molecule, and then how do you go from RNA to protein?,For about three years we just -- I tried to solve the structure of RNA.,It didn't yield. It didn't give good x-ray photographs.,I was decidedly unhappy; a girl didn't marry me.,It was really, you know, sort of a shitty time.,(Laughter) 
 So there's a picture of Francis and I before I met the girl,,so I'm still looking happy.,(Laughter),But there is what we did when we didn't know,where to go forward: we formed a club and called it the RNA Tie Club.,George Gamow, also a great physicist, he designed the tie.,He was one of the members. The question was:,How do you go from a four-letter code,to the 20-letter code of proteins?,Feynman was a member, and Teller, and friends of Gamow.,But that's the only -- no, we were only photographed twice.,And on both occasions, you know, one of us was missing the tie.,There's Francis up on the upper right,,and Alex Rich -- the M.D.-turned-crystallographer -- is next to me.,This was taken in Cambridge in September of 1955.,And I'm smiling, sort of forced, I think,,because the girl I had, boy, she was gone.,(Laughter) 
 And so I didn't really get happy until 1960,,because then we found out, basically, you know,,that there are three forms of RNA.,And we knew, basically, DNA provides the information for RNA.,RNA provides the information for protein.,And that let Marshall Nirenberg, you know, take RNA -- synthetic RNA --,put it in a system making protein. He made polyphenylalanine,,polyphenylalanine. So that's the first cracking of the genetic code,,and it was all over by 1966.,So there, that's what Chris wanted me to do, it was --,so what happened since then?,Well, at that time -- I should go back.,When we found the structure of DNA, I gave my first talk,at Cold Spring Harbor. The physicist, Leo Szilard,,he looked at me and said, "Are you going to patent this?",And -- but he knew patent law, and that we couldn't patent it,,because you couldn't. No use for it.,(Laughter) 
 And so DNA didn't become a useful molecule,,and the lawyers didn't enter into the equation until 1973,,20 years later, when Boyer and Cohen in San Francisco,and Stanford came up with their method of recombinant DNA,,and Stanford patented it and made a lot of money.,At least they patented something,which, you know, could do useful things.,And then, they learned how to read the letters for the code.,And, boom, we've, you know, had a biotech industry. And,,but we were still a long ways from, you know,,answering a question which sort of dominated my childhood,,which is: How do you nature-nurture? 
 And so I'll go on. I'm already out of time,,but this is Michael Wigler, a very, very clever mathematician,turned physicist. And he developed a technique,which essentially will let us look at sample DNA,and, eventually, a million spots along it.,There's a chip there, a conventional one. Then there's one,made by a photolithography by a company in Madison,called NimbleGen, which is way ahead of Affymetrix.,And we use their technique.,And what you can do is sort of compare DNA of normal segs versus cancer.,And you can see on the top,that cancers which are bad show insertions or deletions.,So the DNA is really badly mucked up,,whereas if you have a chance of surviving,,the DNA isn't so mucked up.,So we think that this will eventually lead to what we call,"DNA biopsies." Before you get treated for cancer,,you should really look at this technique,,and get a feeling of the face of the enemy.,It's not a -- it's only a partial look, but it's a --,I think it's going to be very, very useful. 
 So, we started with breast cancer,because there's lots of money for it, no government money.,And now I have a sort of vested interest:,I want to do it for prostate cancer. So, you know,,you aren't treated if it's not dangerous.,But Wigler, besides looking at cancer cells, looked at normal cells,,and made a really sort of surprising observation.,Which is, all of us have about 10 places in our genome,where we've lost a gene or gained another one.,So we're sort of all imperfect. And the question is well,,if we're around here, you know,,these little losses or gains might not be too bad.,But if these deletions or amplifications occurred in the wrong gene,,maybe we'll feel sick. 
 So the first disease he looked at is autism.,And the reason we looked at autism is we had the money to do it.,Looking at an individual is about 3,000 dollars. And the parent of a child,with Asperger's disease, the high-intelligence autism,,had sent his thing to a conventional company; they didn't do it.,Couldn't do it by conventional genetics, but just scanning it,we began to find genes for autism.,And you can see here, there are a lot of them.,So a lot of autistic kids are autistic,because they just lost a big piece of DNA.,I mean, big piece at the molecular level.,We saw one autistic kid,,about five million bases just missing from one of his chromosomes.,We haven't yet looked at the parents, but the parents probably,don't have that loss, or they wouldn't be parents.,Now, so, our autism study is just beginning. We got three million dollars.,I think it will cost at least 10 to 20 before you'd be in a position,to help parents who've had an autistic child,,or think they may have an autistic child,,and can we spot the difference?,So this same technique should probably look at all.,It's a wonderful way to find genes. 
 And so, I'll conclude by saying,we've looked at 20 people with schizophrenia.,And we thought we'd probably have to look at several hundred,before we got the picture. But as you can see,,there's seven out of 20 had a change which was very high.,And yet, in the controls there were three.,So what's the meaning of the controls?,Were they crazy also, and we didn't know it?,Or, you know, were they normal? I would guess they're normal.,And what we think in schizophrenia is there are genes of predisposure,,and whether this is one that predisposes --,and then there's only a sub-segment of the population,that's capable of being schizophrenic. 
 Now, we don't have really any evidence of it,,but I think, to give you a hypothesis, the best guess,is that if you're left-handed, you're prone to schizophrenia.,30 percent of schizophrenic people are left-handed,,and schizophrenia has a very funny genetics,,which means 60 percent of the people are genetically left-handed,,but only half of it showed. I don't have the time to say.,Now, some people who think they're right-handed,are genetically left-handed. OK. I'm just saying that, if you think,,oh, I don't carry a left-handed gene so therefore my, you know,,children won't be at risk of schizophrenia. You might. OK?,(Laughter) 
 So it's, to me, an extraordinarily exciting time.,We ought to be able to find the gene for bipolar;,there's a relationship.,And if I had enough money, we'd find them all this year.,I thank you.My favorite topic is,shortcuts.,The master of shortcuts -- it's, of course, nature.,But I will demonstrate,different ways to get,rid of difficulties and go to the point,,to find an answer,probably much quicker than Arthur did. So,,first,,we violate the common sense,,the logic. All of you, if you hold your hand like this,,90 degrees --,all of you. Not you.,All of you, right? Palm up.,If you do this,,the common, the logic says you must turn the wrist.,Do you agree?,Good.,But I will first teach you,a method, how you can do it without,moving the wrist, and then the shortcut.,You can do it immediately, right?,Hold the hand like this, palm up.,Don't move the wrist. The wrist is --,I doesn't speak very many, but I do the best, what I are.,Right-molded you say, with iron?,That was a joke, actually,,and I --,OK.,Hold the hand palm up. Do this, don't move the wrist.,Over the heart, don't move the wrist.,Forward, don't move the wrist.,Up, don't move the wrist. Over the heart, don't move the wrist.,And forward. Yeah.,Now --,(Laughter) --,logic, logically,,you have got to this position from this, without moving the wrist.,(Laughter),Now, the shortcut.,(Laughter),But it was six moves. Now with one move.,I start here, palm down, you can follow.,And then look at me.,Yeah! (Laughter),One move. OK.,So,,that was the warming up. 
 Now,,I need an assistant.,I talked to a nice girl before, Zoe.,She has left. No! A big hand.,(Applause) 
 Good. Nice. And you can sit over there.,One item here was water, right?,And I will give my tribute,to water.,I think it's enough with water for me. The other guys can talk about -- cheers.,(Laughter),Beer has about --,there's a lot of water in beer.,(Laughter) 
 So, now,I will demonstrate different ways of,memorizing,,control cards and so on.,And I think I'll take off this one.,I work with a special,method to do it, quick.,I work with,precision -- oh, sorry --,control,and,a very powerful ...,memory system, right?,(Laughter),So,,if --,I have studied the poker. I like to gamble.,Officially, I don't gamble but ...,So, if we are --,if we have five person,,and I will do a five-handed poker game. 
 Now I will interact. So a different person,all the time, so not the same person can answer.,So we have an agreement.,Which one shall have a good poker hand?,Which number? One, two, three, four or five? (Audience: Three.) 
 Lennart Green: Three -- good.,And,here,,I had a mat here to make it a little --,the critical moment is -- sorry.,If a card shark gathers the cards together,,immediately when he --,before he deals the card. Now,,so I think, number three,,I have arranged them in a full house.,(Laughter),With queens and -- it's OK --,queens and tens.,That's a challenge. I like this.,I will explain later. One, two, three, four, five.,I start with three queens.,So here you see the contrast when I treat the cards.,And two tens.,Yeah. Thank you.,(Applause),But also the other hand is good, if all the other guys have good hands too.,So these guys have actually a stronger hand --,three aces and two kings.,This guy beats them with,four of a kind, or deuce -- deuce.,No reaction? That with even --,OK, and this.,These look in order, I'm probably -- hopefully --,yeah. Three, four, five, six, seven,and ...,But, of course, I will have the winning hand.,Ten, jack,,queen, king, ace.,Yeah. So,,good.,(Laughter),So the hand that looks so good from the beginning,,number three, at the end,was actually the lowest hand.,Such life. Right? 
 So, please mix them.,Now, if you are interested, I will demonstrate some,underground techniques.,Yes?,I work with,kind of estimation,,shuffle tracking --,ah, good.,Impressive. Thank you.,(Laughter) 
 So, first,,the first term is estimation.,Here, I can estimate exactly how many cards,are put between,my royal flush.,Of course, I can count the cards, but this is much quicker.,Right? You agree.,So here I have, actually --,I know exactly where the cards are.,So here, I can make a bet,,and this is actually one of the points where I get my money.,So here: 10, jack,,queen, king, ace.,OK.,(Applause) 
 Next,is a term --,I do it quick. I call this stealing.,So here, I think,I know about where the cards are.,I will spread the cards and you'll say stop,,when I point to them, right. Point, say stop. 
 Zoe: Stop. 
 LG: Here -- you see some are missing?,And that's the stealing cards, which I did.,(Laughter) 
 OK.,Now, another term called shuffle tracking.,Shuffle tracking means I keep track of the cards,,even if another person shuffles.,This is a little risky.,So -- because if you look, now, I can still see it.,You agree? But if you square --,square, and shuffle,,and then a cut.,So here,,to follow my cards, I must look at the shuffle from the begin --,ah, we are started together. It's OK, it's OK.,Come to -- no, no, no, no.,I'm joking, yeah?,Any style -- yeah, good.,Here I have to calculate, but actually, I don't like to calculate.,I work direct with the right brain.,If you pass the left brain,,you have to take care of logic and common sense.,Direct in the right brain, that's much better. And so --,(Laughter) --,Arthur Benjamin did,a little of the same thing.,And if you work with, in the right atmosphere, with humor,,you have -- that's the password,to the,cosmic bank of knowledge,,where you can find any solution of any problem. 
 OK. Now, I drop the cards,,and you say stop anyway, right?,Not at the last card. 
 Zoe: Stop. LG: Yeah. 
 When I'm sober, I do this much quicker, but we will check.,(Laughter),Ah, not in order, it -- that was a mistake.,No, I'm kidding.,(Applause),No, now and then I put in a mistake,,just to emphasize how difficult it is.,Right?,Yeah, last night I forgot that. That was a mistake.,But now I'm glad I remember it.,So,,this deck is bought here. Sorry.,I have a little pad,to make it a little softer.,This deck is bought here in America.,It's called,"Bicycle." And this deck is very flexible,,but not so many people know,,if you check, if you press at,the right spots,,you see how thin and flexible this deck is, right?,Now, you can carry this in your wallet,,so ...,You don't see it, make no reaction?,(Laughter),So, but here,,and --,is the camera getting too much? No.,(Laughter) 
 Yeah? (Audience: It's getting too much.) 
 LG: Pardon? But then, when we will have it back, you do this.,But not too much.,Then you have to push it down again.,Here, please. If you push these,heaps -- everyone see --,push them together so they are really interlaced,,right? Yeah, good.,Perfect.,Just push them through, good. Thank you.,And then, I will demonstrate a thing from,Russian satellite,,stealen -- stolen,,probably copied from America but we will see. 
 Here --,shortcuts. I talk about shortcuts.,Now I go very quick,through the deck and try to find some pattern.,The new chaos theory is already old, right?,But you know, I think you are,familiar with fractals --,the Mandelbrot spirals and all these things.,And it's much,easier to memorize cards in a pattern way,,and not concentrate. If you concentrate and calculate,,then you go to --,then it's the left brain. But if you just look and talk,in another language ...,Yeah, great.,I think I have it. 
 So now, different persons, older, tap.,Please name any card, anyone. 
 (Audience: Jack of spades.) LG: Jack of spades. 
 Jack of spades.,I think jack of spades is number 12 from the top.,One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight,,nine, 10, 11,,12. Yes, right.,So -- oh, jack of spades. 
 You said spades? (Audience: Yes.) LG: Ah.,My fault. Don't applaud, this was clubs.,So, jack of spades.,I think ...,23 --,24, sorry, 24.,One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine,,10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17,,18, 19, 20, 21, 22,,23 --,ah, 25, yes.,It's the last.,Now, I do it quicker, better.,OK. Another person. Oh, I forgot, I shouldn't shuffle but I think --,(Laughter),-- actually, my technique is to peek,,all the time.,When I lift the heap, I peek.,You see, yeah, perfect.,Three, four, five, six. Then I calculate -- yeah, good.,(Laughter) 
 Another person, another card. (Audience: Seven of diamonds.) 
 LG: Seven of diamonds. Perfect, my favorite, yeah, seven.,So I will do it quick,,very quick, but in slow motion, so you can follow.,(Laughter) 
 Seven of? (Audience: Diamonds.) 
 LG: Diamonds, good. I start here.,Good, thank you.,(Applause),The thing I did -- I peeked.,I know where the card were,,then I chose it. So another person, another card.,(Laughter),Another person. 
 (Audience: Ten of diamonds.),LG: Pardon?,(Audience: Ten of diamonds.) 
 LG: Ten of diamonds, yeah.,I think I do it the same way. I like to,,so I know where it is.,Ten of diamonds.,But now I do it the regular speed, right?,Ten of diamonds.,Good.,Maybe you will cut? Lift.,Excellent.,So, thank you. Another person, another card. 
 (Audience: Five of clubs.) 
 LG: Pardon? (Audience: Five of clubs.) 
 LG: Five of clubs. It's not the same person, even if it's the same spot.,We can take some over there later. So now, I will drop the cards.,And you'll say stop, anywhere. Got it?,Five of clubs.,Not the last. Yes, that's difficult to find a card here.,(Laughter),We do it again.,The person who said five of clubs say stop,,when the cards are in the air, right? 
 (Audience: Stop.) 
 LG: Very good.,OK.,(Applause) 
 OK, I had to use a little force there.,I think we save five of clubs.,And now a card with a contrast of five of clubs. 
 (Audience: Queen of hearts.) LG: Queen of hearts, yeah.,Excellent. I love that card.,Here, I will do the most difficult thing.,For example, you are sitting in Las Vegas,,and you're betting,,and you let the other guys,peek this card by mistake. Feel, it's just the regular, one card.,And now, when I lift this card,,it shall be your card. What was your card? 
 (Audience: Queen of hearts.) 
 LG: Queen of? Queen of hearts.,So that's a tough challenge, right?,So here, I grab --,you know this? Five of clubs ...,and queen of hearts. Yes!,This is a tough one,,because here I must take advantage of --,I switch it with the five of clubs.,So, now,a false count.,Which card shall I use? Queen or five? 
 Zoe: The queen. LG: Queen, yes. 
 So, I use the queen, and here's five of clubs.,The false count -- and the number,one, two, three,,four, five, six, seven, eight --,you say the same card all the time.,Eight, nine, 10.,This is a kind of optical deal, right?,When I put one card at a table --,look, it's not one card. It's -- look,,it's a bunch of cards that gives this,impression.,Yeah.,Now some hard stuff.,I think we keep the queen here, yes.,Now, to the satellites things.,This --,oh sorry, don't look at the beam. My fault.,(Laughter) 
 This is high-frequency laser,,and it's enough with a fraction of a second,to destroy the retina completely.,Right, sorry, my -- I should have mentioned that, yeah.,But you can relax,,because it takes half an hour before it works,,so you have plenty of time to see my whole performance.,(Laughter),Now,,I put the laser here,,and --,now, when I deal the cards in the laser,,I know where they are but -- yes?,Did the camera got it?,No?,They didn't?,What happened? 
 (Audience: It disappeared.) 
 LG: OK, I'll take another group.,Do the cameras see the cards now? 
 No? (Audience: No, they're all gone.) 
 LG: But you see the hand.,Ah, good, good, good. But now.,So now, that was the reason, right?,You see the cards? Yes.,(Laughter),Yeah, good.,Now --,(Laughter),-- one guy laughed. So now, to find the queen,,do it this way: take back the other one, take back the queen.,(Laughter),Yeah, interesting,,but a little dangerous.,(Laughter),I liked it. Now,,a little more difficult.,Name -- anyone, name, please, any suit. 
 (Audience: Spades.) LG: Spades? Spades, good. 
 So here,,here I have to peek, lots of cards.,I think there are lots of --,I don't know how many -- but 10, 15 spades in a deck, at least, right?,(Laughter),So every time I lift the heap, I peek, right.,Then I arrange them so I can,get them quick.,Perfect, excellent.,So I start with the ace --,yeah, ace. Ah, yeah -- spades?,Same mistake as before, right?,So -- I arrange the spades -- the clubs.,I try to do this right here. First, I take the spades.,You see, I don't work with prestige,,so always do mistakes.,It doesn't matter to me.,And now and then, I get some extra sympathy points, right?,One,,two, three, four -- yes,,the camera got it? Five, six,,seven, eight --,ah --,nine, 10,,the jack,,jack of spades,,queen of --,I like that laugh, yeah! Good. Queen.,(Laughter),Wait, wait, wait -- please take any card.,Grab any one. Quick, quick, good.,And we switch this to the king.,Ace of diamonds.,And now, look, ace of diamonds will guide.,So I find ...,king of spades.,There was the place. And here is king of spades, correct?,Yeah? OK.,(Applause) 
 Now, a little more difficult thing.,Maybe you think I have the cards in order already,,so you help me to shuffle again.,Another suit, please. 
 (Audience: Armani.) LG: Pardon? (Audience: Armani.),(Laughter) 
 LG: It was after the blindfold.,I like this guy, yeah.,OK. That should be my end effect, but OK.,Armani -- who said Armani? You?,I drop the cards and you -- which size?,Which size? It's a piece of cake. I like challenges.,Which size? 
 (Audience: Extra large.) LG: Extra large, OK. 
 Say stop. (Audience: Stop.),(Laughter) 
 LG: Yeah, Armani. OK.,(Applause),Ah, this is tough.,OK, a suit. I had clubs before, spades. 
 Another suit. (Audience: Diamonds.) LG: Diamonds, perfect. 
 So, in this case,,I try to,locate diamonds. I look at the cards, and OK.,We try. Yeah. You help me.,If I drop the card face up,,like this, you reverse it. Zoe: OK.,LG: OK, now.,Do with both hands, and quick. Yes, good, good.,(Laughter),I think we have it now. Yeah, good, good.,So here,,diamonds, hearts -- no, diamonds. Good, good.,Stop. Do you see the pattern?,No? Now?,Yes, yes, OK.,I work with pattern.,Oh sorry, I dropped one.,Maybe it's important --,yeah --,nine of diamonds, OK.,So now --,I always ask,,why do I put myself in this position?,I have to figure out so many outs,,when I miss some cards, but,I love it. So now,,I will do it. I will try to find,the diamonds,,but I will do it the hard way.,It's too easy to do it right away, right?,I think I will do it ...,blindfolded.,At this distance, it works immediately.,Aargh!,(Laughter) 
 Duct tape.,I look -- shake the cards, so I don't.,Go ahead. Yeah, good. I like the empathy.,Empathy.,But it was -- did you hear?,It was women's voice. Hear the guy -- yeah, more, more, more.,(Laughter),Yeah, good. Yeah.,You can take the nostril too, because some guys think --,(Laughter),-- some guys think I can peek through the nostril, so do,more. Go, go.,Right? Good.,Satisfied?,Looks good, like Batman. Ow!,(Laughter),No, with dignity and elegance, right?,But I like her, yeah. I said, be a little tough.,And it was OK. One more?,The last.,OK.,All right. 
 Now you must agree that I'm --,I must rely on other senses, right?,I work with vibration.,So,,what was the card?,Diamonds. Ah, I memorized hearts.,So now I have,to improvise again.,Maybe I'll stand up. Half.,Diamonds -- I'll start with ace of diamonds.,Just kidding, warming up -- king of hearts.,(Laughter),And I give you a diamonds, so they -- so you put them here,,in a nice row, right. And you can see, yeah? Good.,Ace of diamonds, yes? Zoe: Yeah. 
 LG: Good. Good. Two -- (Applause) --,thank you.,I never ever miss two. This is interesting.,Always I've found two,,but the wrong color. Spades, sorry.,And the deck is a gift to you after,,so let the skepticals here, in this,,examine them, right? Remind me. It's a gift.,Two -- and it was two of spades, right?,Sorry, two of diamonds. I'll do it quick now.,Three --,three of diamonds. Yes!,Four --,I like challenges, yes.,Yeah, good. 
 Chris Anderson: You're peeking. 
 LG: Pardon? 
 CA: You're peeking. You just got to --,this is a request from the lady in the back.,(Laughter) 
 Okay.,Try that.,LG: Yeah. Also listen.,OK, now.,This is maybe a little tough.,We will try.,Yes? Good?,(Laughter),OK. So,,how many cards? Five? Zoe: Four. 
 LG: Four. Is five the next card? 
 Zoe: Five of diamonds, yeah. 
 LG: It's not here? Zoe: It's not there. 
 LG: Oh.,So here,,all the cards are face down --,you agree? (Audience: Yes.) 
 LG: Yes? You see that in the screen?,And this is face up, and it's not at the bottom here.,So next card will be -- was it five? 
 Zoe: Five. LG: Yeah --,I will reverse it face up here. 
 Yes? Zoe: Yeah.,LG: Six -- six with the thumb.,Seven.,Yeah, I do this. I know where it is,,because I peeked before and then I do this.,Right?,Eight.,If --,and then nine, right?,Yeah.,Yesterday -- the day before yesterday, I was in Vegas,,and I used this actually.,Nine? Yeah? Correct?,No? Yes! Ah, good, good.,Ten --,once again, I love this Jonny Wayne move.,Yeah. Jack -- you [unclear] with Jack?,Jack,of,diamonds, correct? (Audience: No.) 
 LG: Yes?,And,queen! Queen, with misdirection.,Misdirection. (Applause),Yeah?,And then,,king, after exactly,five seconds.,Yeah. Five. Five seconds.,One,,two, three, four -- mmm!,Check it.,Yes? 
 CA: King of diamonds. LG: Ah!,Good. Oh.,Touch me, feel --,ah, ah, you know! 
 CA: Ladies and gentlemen, Lennart Green! LG: Okay, thank you.The fragrance that you will smell, you will never be able to smell this way again.,Its a fragrance called Beyond Paradise,,which you can find in any store in the nation.,Except here its been split up in parts by Este Lauder,and by the perfumer who did it, Calice Becker,,and I'm most grateful to them for this.,And its been split up in successive bits and a chord. 
 So what youre smelling now is the top note.,And then will come what they call the heart, the lush heart note.,I will show it to you.,The Eden top note is named after the Eden Project in the U.K. 
 The lush heart note, Melaleuca bark note -- which does not contain any Melaleuca bark,,because its totally forbidden. 
 And after that, the complete fragrance.,Now what you are smelling is a combination of --,I asked how many molecules there were in there, and nobody would tell me.,So I put it through a G.C., a Gas Chromatograph that I have in my office,,and its about 400.,So what youre smelling is several hundred molecules,floating through the air, hitting your nose. 
 And do not get the impression that this is very subjective.,You are all smelling pretty much the same thing, OK?,Smell has this reputation of being somewhat different for each person.,Its not really true.,And perfumery shows you that cant be true,,because if it were like that it wouldnt be an art, OK? 
 Now, while the smell wafts over you, let me tell you the history of an idea.,Everything that youre smelling in here,is made up of atoms that come from what I call,the Upper East Side of the periodic table -- a nice, safe neighborhood.,(Laughter),You really dont want to leave it if you want to have a career in perfumery.,Some people have tried in the 1920s,to add things from the bad parts, and it didnt really work. 
 These are the five atoms from which just about everything,that youre going to smell in real life, from coffee to fragrance, are made of.,The top note that you smelled at the very beginning,,the cut-grass green, what we call in perfumery -- theyre weird terms --,and this would be called a green note,,because it smells of something green, like cut grass. 
 This is cis-3-hexene-1-ol. And I had to learn chemistry on the fly,in the last three years. A very expensive high school chemistry education.,This has six carbon atoms, so "hexa," hexene-1-ol.,It has one double bond, it has an alcohol on the end,,so its "ol," and thats why they call it cis-3-hexene-1-ol.,Once you figure this out, you can really impress people at parties. 
 This smells of cut grass. Now, this is the skeleton of the molecule.,If you dress it up with atoms, hydrogen atoms --,thats what it looks like when you have it on your computer --,but actually its sort of more like this, in the sense that the atoms have a certain,sphere that you cannot penetrate. They repel. 
 OK, now. Why does this thing smell of cut grass, OK?,Why doesnt it smell of potatoes or violets? Well, there are really two theories.,But the first theory is: it must be the shape.,And thats a perfectly reasonable theory in the sense that,almost everything else in biology works by shape.,Enzymes that chew things up, antibodies, its all, you know,,the fit between a protein and whatever it is grabbing, in this case a smell.,And I will try and explain to you whats wrong with this notion. 
 And the other theory is that we smell molecular vibrations.,Now, this is a totally insane idea.,And when I first came across it in the early '90s, I thought my predecessor,,Malcolm Dyson and Bob Wright, had really taken leave of their senses,,and Ill explain to you why this was the case.,However, I came to realize gradually that they may be right --,and I have to convince all my colleagues that this is so, but Im working on it. 
 Heres how shape works in normal receptors.,You have a molecule coming in, it gets into the protein, which is schematic here,,and it causes this thing to switch, to turn, to move in some way,by binding in certain parts.,And the attraction, the forces, between the molecule and the protein,cause the motion. This is a shape-based idea. 
 Now, whats wrong with shape is summarized in this slide.,The way --I expect everybody to memorize these compounds.,This is one page of work from a chemists workbook, OK?,Working for a fragrance company.,Hes making 45 molecules, and hes looking for a sandalwood,,something that smells of sandalwood.,Because theres a lot of money in sandalwoods.,And of these 45 molecules, only 4629 actually smells of sandalwood.,And he puts an exclamation mark, OK? This is an awful lot of work.,This actually is roughly, in man-years of work, 200,000 dollars roughly,,if you keep them on the low salaries with no benefits.,So this is a profoundly inefficient process.,And my definition of a theory is, its not just something,that you teach people; its labor saving.,A theory is something that enables you to do less work.,I love the idea of doing less work. So let me explain to you why -- a very simple fact,that tells you why this shape theory really does not work very well. 
 This is cis-3-hexene-1-ol. It smells of cut grass.,This is cis-3-hexene-1-thiol, and this smells of rotten eggs, OK?,Now, you will have noticed that vodka never smells of rotten eggs.,If it does, you put the glass down, you go to a different bar.,This is -- in other words, we never get the O-H --,we never mistake it for an S-H, OK?,Like, at no concentration, even pure, you know,,if you smelt pure ethanol, it doesnt smell of rotten eggs.,Conversely, there is no concentration at which the sulfur compound will smell like vodka.,Its very hard to explain this by molecular recognition.,Now, I showed this to a physicist friend of mine who has a profound distaste,for biology, and he says, "Thats easy! The things are a different color!",(Laughter) 
 We have to go a little beyond that. Now let me explain why vibrational theory has,some sort of interest in it. These molecules, as you saw in the beginning,,the building blocks had springs connecting them to each other.,In fact, molecules are able to vibrate at a set of frequencies,which are very specific for each molecule and for the bonds connecting them. 
 So this is the sound of the O-H stretch, translated into the audible range.,S-H, quite a different frequency.,Now, this is kind of interesting, because it tells you,that you should be looking for a particular fact, which is this:,nothing in the world smells like rotten eggs except S-H, OK? 
 Now, Fact B: nothing in the world has that frequency except S-H.,If you look on this, imagine a piano keyboard.,The S-H stretch is in the middle of a part of the keyboard,that has been, so to speak, damaged,,and there are no neighboring notes, nothing is close to it.,You have a unique smell, a unique vibration. 
 So I went searching when I started in this game,to convince myself that there was any degree of plausibility,to this whole crazy story.,I went searching for a type of molecule, any molecule,,that would have that vibration and that -- the obvious prediction,was that it should absolutely smell of sulfur.,If it didnt, the whole idea was toast, and I might as well move on to other things. 
 Now, after searching high and low for several months,,I discovered that there was a type of molecule called a Borane,which has exactly the same vibration.,Now the good news is, Boranes you can get hold of.,The bad news is theyre rocket fuels.,Most of them explode spontaneously in contact with air,,and when you call up the companies, they only give you minimum ten tons, OK?,(Laughter),So this was not what they call a laboratory-scale experiment,,and they wouldnt have liked it at my college. 
 However, I managed to get a hold of a Borane eventually, and here is the beast.,And it really does have the same -- if you calculate,,if you measure the vibrational frequencies, they are the same as S-H. 
 Now, does it smell of sulfur? Well, if you go back in the literature,,theres a man who knew more about Boranes than anyone,alive then or since, Alfred Stock, he synthesized all of them.,And in an enormous 40-page paper in German he says, at one point --,my wife is German and she translated it for me --,and at one point he says, "ganz widerlich Geruch,",an "absolutely repulsive smell," which is good. Reminiscent of hydrogen sulfide.,So this fact that Boranes smell of sulfur,had been known since 1910, and utterly forgotten until 1997, 1998. 
 Now, the slight fly in the ointment is this: that,if we smell molecular vibrations, we must have a spectroscope in our nose.,Now, this is a spectroscope, OK, on my laboratory bench.,And its fair to say that if you look up somebodys nose,,youre unlikely to see anything resembling this.,And this is the main objection to the theory. 
 OK, great, we smell vibrations. How? All right?,Now when people ask this kind of question, they neglect something,,which is that physicists are really clever, unlike biologists.,(Laughter),This is a joke. Im a biologist, OK?,So its a joke against myself. 
 Bob Jacklovich and John Lamb at Ford Motor Company,,in the days when Ford Motor was spending vast amounts of money,on fundamental research, discovered a way,to build a spectroscope that was intrinsically nano-scale.,In other words, no mirrors, no lasers, no prisms, no nonsense,,just a tiny device, and he built this device. And this device uses electron tunneling.,Now, I could do the dance of electron tunneling,,but Ive done a video instead, which is much more interesting. Heres how it works. 
 Electrons are fuzzy creatures, and they can jump across gaps,,but only at equal energy. If the energy differs, they cant jump.,Unlike us, they wont fall off the cliff.,OK. Now. If something absorbs the energy, the electron can travel.,So here you have a system, you have something --,and theres plenty of that stuff in biology --,some substance giving an electron, and the electron tries to jump,,and only when a molecule comes along that has the right vibration,does the reaction happen, OK?,This is the basis for the device that these two guys at Ford built. 
 And every single part of this mechanism is actually plausible in biology.,In other words, Ive taken off-the-shelf components,,and Ive made a spectroscope.,Whats nice about this idea, if you have a philosophical bent of mind,,is that then it tells you that the nose,,the ear and the eye are all vibrational senses.,Of course, it doesnt matter, because it could also be that theyre not.,But it has a certain --,(Laughter),-- it has a certain ring to it which is attractive to people,who read too much 19th-century German literature. 
 And then a magnificent thing happened:,I left academia and joined the real world of business,,and a company was created around my ideas,to make new molecules using my method,,along the lines of, lets put someone elses money where your mouth is.,And one of the first things that happened was,we started going around to fragrance companies,asking for what they needed, because, of course,,if you could calculate smell, you dont need chemists.,You need a computer, a Mac will do it, if you know how to program the thing right,,OK? So you can try a thousand molecules,,you can try ten thousand molecules in a weekend,,and then you only tell the chemists to make the right one.,And so thats a direct path to making new odorants. 
 And one of the first things that happened was,we went to see some perfumers in France --,and heres where I do my Charles Fleischer impression --,and one of them says, "You cannot make a coumarin.",He says to me, "I bet you cannot make a coumarin." 
 Now, coumarin is a very common thing, a material,,in fragrance which is derived from a bean that comes from South America.,And it is the classic synthetic aroma chemical, OK?,Its the molecule that has made mens fragrances,smell the way they do since 1881, to be exact. 
 And the problem is its a carcinogen.,So nobody likes particularly to -- you know, aftershave with carcinogens.,(Laughter),There are some reckless people, but its not worth it, OK? 
 So they asked us to make a new coumarin. And so we started doing calculations.,And the first thing you do is you calculate the vibrational spectrum,of coumarin, and you smooth it out,,so that you have a nice picture of what the sort of chord, so to speak, of coumarin is.,And then you start cranking the computer to find other molecules,,related or unrelated, that have the same vibrations. 
 And we actually, in this case, Im sorry to say,,it happened -- it was serendipitous.,Because I got a phone call from our chief chemist,and he said, look, Ive just found this such a beautiful reaction,,that even if this compound doesnt smell of coumarin,,I want to do it, its just such a nifty,,one step -- I mean, chemists have weird minds --,one step, 90 percent yield, you know, and you get this lovely,crystalline compound. Let us try it. 
 And I said, first of all, let me do the calculation on that compound, bottom right,,which is related to coumarin, but has an extra pentagon inserted into the molecule.,Calculate the vibrations, the purple spectrum is that new fellow,,the white one is the old one.,And the prediction is it should smell of coumarin.,They made it ... and it smelled exactly like coumarin.,And this is our new baby, called tonkene.,You see, when youre a scientist, youre always selling ideas.,And people are very resistant to ideas, and rightly so.,Why should new ideas be accepted?,But when you put a little 10-gram vial on the table in front of perfumers,and it smells like coumarin, and it isnt coumarin,,and youve found it in three weeks,,this focuses everybodys mind wonderfully.,(Laughter),(Applause) 
 And people often ask me, is your theory accepted?,And I said, well, by whom? I mean most, you know -- theres three attitudes:,Youre right, and I dont know why, which is the most rational one at this point.,Youre right, and I dont care how you do it, in a sense;,you bring me the molecules, you know.,And: Youre completely wrong, and Im sure youre completely wrong. 
 OK? Now, were dealing with people who only want results,,and this is the commercial world.,And they tell us that even if we do it by astrology, theyre happy.,But were not actually doing it by astrology.,But for the last three years, Ive had what I consider to be,the best job in the entire universe, which is to put my hobby --,which is, you know, fragrance and all the magnificent things --,plus a little bit of biophysics, a small amount of self-taught chemistry,at the service of something that actually works. 
 Thank you very much.,(Applause)I want you to imagine that you're a student in my lab.,What I want you to do is to create a biologically inspired design.,And so here's the challenge:,I want you to help me create a fully 3D, dynamic, parameterized contact model.,The translation of that is, could you help me build a foot?,And it is a true challenge, and I do want you to help me.,Of course, in the challenge there is a prize.,It's not quite the TED Prize, but it is an exclusive t-shirt from our lab.,So please send me your ideas about how to design a foot. 
 Now if we want to design a foot, what do we have to do?,We have to first know what a foot is.,If we go to the dictionary, it says, "It's the lower extremity of a leg,that is in direct contact with the ground in standing or walking",That's the traditional definition.,But if you wanted to really do research, what do you have to do?,You have to go to the literature and look up what's known about feet.,So you go to the literature. (Laughter) 
 Maybe you're familiar with this literature.,The problem is, there are many, many feet.,How do you do this?,You need to survey all feet and extract the principles of how they work.,And I want you to help me do that in this next clip.,As you see this clip, look for principles,,and also think about experiments that you might design,in order to understand how a foot works. 
 See any common themes? Principles?,What would you do?,What experiments would you run?,Wow. (Applause),Our research on the biomechanics of animal locomotion,has allowed us to make a blueprint for a foot.,It's a design inspired by nature, but it's not a copy of any specific foot you just looked at,,but it's a synthesis of the secrets of many, many feet. 
 Now it turns out that animals can go anywhere.,They can locomote on substrates that vary as you saw --,in the probability of contact, the movement of that surface,and the type of footholds that are present.,If you want to study how a foot works,,we're going to have to simulate those surfaces, or simulate that debris.,When we did that, here's a new experiment that we did:,we put an animal and had it run -- this grass spider --,on a surface with 99 percent of the contact area removed.,But it didn't even slow down the animal.,It's still running at the human equivalent of 300 miles per hour. 
 Now how could it do that? Well, look more carefully.,When we slow it down 50 times we see how the leg is hitting that simulated debris.,The leg is acting as a foot.,And in fact, the animal contacts other parts of its leg,more frequently than the traditionally defined foot.,The foot is distributed along the whole leg.,You can do another experiment where you can take a cockroach with a foot,,and you can remove its foot.,I'm passing some cockroaches around. Take a look at their feet.,Without a foot, here's what it does. It doesn't even slow down.,It can run the same speed without even that segment.,No problem for the cockroach -- they can grow them back, if you care.,How do they do it?,Look carefully: this is slowed down 100 times,,and watch what it's doing with the rest of its leg.,It's acting, again, as a distributed foot --,very effective. 
 Now, the question we had is, how general is a distributed foot?,And the next behavior I'll show you of this animal just stunned us the first time that we saw it.,Journalists, this is off the record; it's embargoed.,Take a look at what that is!,That's a bipedal octopus that's disguised as a rolling coconut.,It was discovered by Christina Huffard,and filmed by Sea Studios, right here from Monterey. 
 We've also described another species of bipedal octopus.,This one disguises itself as floating algae.,It walks on two legs and it holds the other arms up in the air so that it can't be seen.,(Applause),And look what it does with its foot to get over challenging terrain.,It uses that beautiful distributed foot to make it as if those obstacles are not even there --,truly extraordinary. 
 In 1951, Escher made this drawing. He thought he created an animal fantasy.,But we know that art imitates life,,and it turns out nature, three million years ago, evolved the next animal.,It's a shrimp-like animal called the stomatopod,,and here's how it moves on the beaches of Panama:,it actually rolls, and it can even roll uphill.,It's the ultimate distributed foot: its whole body in this case is acting like its foot. 
 So, if we want to then, to our blueprint, add the first important feature,,we want to add distributed foot contact.,Not just with the traditional foot, but also the leg,,and even of the body.,Can this help us inspire the design of novel robots?,We biologically inspired this robot, named RHex,,built by these extraordinary engineers over the last few years.,RHex's foot started off to be quite simple,,then it got tuned over time, and ultimately resulted in this half circle.,Why is that? The video will show you.,Watch where the robot, now, contacts its leg in order to deal with this very difficult terrain.,What you'll see, in fact, is that it's using that half circle leg as a distributed foot.,Watch it go over this.,You can see it here well on this debris.,Extraordinary. No sensing, all the control is built right into the tuned legs.,Really simple, but beautiful. 
 Now, you might have noticed something else about the animals,when they were running over the rough terrain.,And my assistant's going to help me here.,When you touched the cockroach leg -- can you get the microphone for him?,When you touched the cockroach leg, what did it feel like?,Did you notice something? 
 Boy: Spiny. 
 Robert Full: It's spiny, right? It's really spiny, isn't it? It sort of hurts.,Maybe we could give it to our curator and see if he'd be brave enough to touch the cockroach.,(Laughter) 
 Chris Anderson: Did you touch it? 
 RF: So if you look carefully at this, what you see is that they have spines,and until a few weeks ago, no one knew what they did.,They assumed that they were for protection and for sensory structures.,We found that they're for something else -- here's a segment of that spine.,They're tuned such that they easily collapse in one direction,to pull the leg out from debris,,but they're stiff in the other direction so they capture disparities in the surface. 
 Now crabs don't miss footholds, because they normally move on sand --,until they come to our lab.,And where they have a problem with this kind of mesh,,because they don't have spines.,The crabs are missing spines, so they have a problem in this kind of rough terrain.,But of course, we can deal with that,because we can produce artificial spines.,We can make spines that catch on simulated debris,and collapse on removal to easily pull them out.,We did that by putting these artificial spines on crabs,,as you see here, and then we tested them.,Do we really understand that principle of tuning? The answer is, yes!,This is slowed down 20-fold, and the crab just zooms across that simulated debris.,(Laughter) (Applause),A little better than nature. 
 So to our blueprint, we need to add tuned spines.,Now will this help us think about the design of more effective climbing robots?,Well, here's RHex: RHex has trouble on rails -- on smooth rails, as you see here.,So why not add a spine? My colleagues did this at U. Penn.,Dan Koditschek put some steel nails -- very simple version -- on the robot,,and here's RHex, now, going over those steel -- those rails. No problem!,How does it do it?,Let's slow it down and you can see the spines in action.,Watch the leg come around, and you'll see it grab on right there.,It couldn't do that before; it would just slip and get stuck and tip over.,And watch again, right there -- successful. 
 Now just because we have a distributed foot and spines,doesn't mean you can climb vertical surfaces.,This is really, really difficult.,But look at this animal do it!,One of the ones I'm passing around is climbing up this vertical surface that's a smooth metal plate.,It's extraordinary how fast it can do it --,but if you slow it down, you see something that's quite extraordinary.,It's a secret. The animal effectively climbs by slipping and look --,and doing, actually, terribly, with respect to grabbing on the surface.,It looks, in fact, like it's swimming up the surface.,We can actually model that behavior better as a fluid, if you look at it.,The distributed foot, actually, is working more like a paddle. 
 The same is true when we looked at this lizard running on fluidized sand.,Watch its feet.,It's actually functioning as a paddle,even though it's interacting with a surface that we normally think of as a solid.,This is not different from what my former undergraduate discovered,when she figured out how lizards can run on water itself.,Can you use this to make a better robot?,Martin Buehler did -- who's now at Boston Dynamics --,he took this idea and made RHex to be Aqua RHex.,So here's RHex with paddles,,now converted into an incredibly maneuverable swimming robot. 
 For rough surfaces, though, animals add claws.,And you probably feel them if you grabbed it.,Did you touch it? 
 CA: I did. 
 RF: And they do really well at grabbing onto surfaces with these claws.,Mark Cutkosky at Stanford University, one of my collaborators, is an extraordinary engineer,who developed this technique called Shape Deposition Manufacturing,,where he can imbed claws right into an artificial foot.,And here's the simple version of a foot for a new robot that I'll show you in a bit.,So to our blueprint, let's attach claws.,Now if we look at animals, though, to be really maneuverable in all surfaces,,the animals use hybrid mechanisms,that include claws, and spines, and hairs, and pads, and glue, and capillary adhesion,and a whole bunch of other things.,These are all from different insects.,There's an ant crawling up a vertical surface.,Let's look at that ant. 
 This is the foot of an ant. You see the hairs and the claws and this thing here.,This is when its foot's in the air.,Watch what happens when the foot goes onto your sandwich.,You see what happens?,That pad comes out. And that's where the glue is.,Here from underneath is an ant foot,,and when the claws don't dig in, that pad automatically comes out without the ant doing anything.,It just extrudes.,And this was a hard shot to get -- I think this is the shot of the ant foot on the superstrings.,So it's pretty tough to do.,This is what it looks like close up --,here's the ant foot, and there's the glue. 
 And we discovered this glue may be an interesting two-phase mixture.,It certainly helps it to hold on.,So to our blueprint, we stick on some sticky pads.,Now you might think for smooth surfaces we get inspiration here.,Now we have something better here.,The gecko's a really great example of nanotechnology in nature.,These are its feet.,They're -- almost look alien. And the secret, which they stick on with,,involves their hairy toes.,They can run up a surface at a meter per second,,take 30 steps in that one second -- you can hardly see them.,If we slow it down, they attach their feet at eight milliseconds,,and detach them in 16 milliseconds.,And when you watch how they detach it, it is bizarre.,They peel away from the surface like you'd peel away a piece of tape.,Very strange. How do they stick? 
 If you look at their feet, they have leaf-like structures called linalae,with millions of hairs.,And each hair has the worst case of split ends possible.,It has a hundred to a thousand split ends,,and that's the secret, because it allows intimate contact.,The gecko has a billion of these 200-nanometer-sized split ends.,And they don't stick by glue, or they don't work like Velcro, or they don't work with suction.,We discovered they work by intermolecular forces alone.,So to our blueprint, we split some hairs.,This has inspired the design of the first self-cleaning dry adhesive --,the patent issued, we're happy to say.,And here's the simplest version in nature,,and here's my collaborator Ron Fearing's attempt,at an artificial version of this dry adhesive made from polyurethane.,And here's the first attempt to have it work on some load. 
 There's enormous interest in this in a variety of different fields.,You could think of a thousand possible uses, I'm sure.,Lots of people have, and we're excited about realizing this as a product.,We have imagined products; for example, this one:,we imagined a bio-inspired Band-Aid, where we took the glue off the Band-Aid.,We took some hairs from a molting gecko;,put three rolls of them on here, and then made this Band-Aid. 
 This is an undergraduate volunteer --,we have 30,000 undergraduates so we can choose among them --,that's actually just a red pen mark.,But it makes an incredible Band-Aid.,It's aerated, it can be peeled off easily, it doesn't cause any irritation, it works underwater.,I think this is an extraordinary example of how curiosity-based research --,we just wondered how they climbed up something --,can lead to things that you could never imagine.,It's just an example of why we need to support curiosity-based research.,Here you are, pulling off the Band-Aid. 
 So we've redefined, now, what a foot is.,The question is, can we use these secrets, then,,to inspire the design of a better foot, better than one that we see in nature?,Here's the new project:,we're trying to create the first climbing search-and-rescue robot -- no suction or magnets --,that can only move on limited kinds of surfaces.,I call the new robot RiSE, for "Robot in Scansorial Environment" -- that's a climbing environment --,and we have an extraordinary team of biologists and engineers creating this robot.,And here is RiSE.,It's six-legged and has a tail. Here it is on a fence and a tree.,And here are RiSE's first steps on an incline.,You have the audio? You can hear it go up.,And here it is coming up at you, in its first steps up a wall.,Now it's only using its simplest feet here, so this is very new.,But we think we got the dynamics right of the robot. 
 Mark Cutkosky, though, is taking it a step further.,He's the one able to build this shape-deposition manufactured feet and toes.,The next step is to make compliant toes,,and try to add spines and claws and set it for dry adhesives.,So the idea is to first get the toes and a foot right,,attempt to make that climb, and ultimately put it on the robot.,And that's exactly what he's done.,He's built, in fact, a climbing foot-bot inspired by nature. 
 And here's Cutkosky's and his amazing students' design.,So these are tuned toes -- there are six of them,,and they use the principles that I just talked about collectively for the blueprint.,So this is not using any suction, any glue,,and it will ultimately, when it's attached to the robot --,it's as biologically inspired as the animal --,hopefully be able to climb any kind of a surface.,Here you see it, next, going up the side of a building at Stanford.,It's sped up -- again, it's a foot climbing.,It's not the whole robot yet, we're working on it --,now you can see how it's attaching.,These tuned structures allow the spines, friction pads and ultimately the adhesive hairs,to grab onto very challenging, difficult surfaces.,And so they were able to get this thing -- this is now sped up 20 times --,can you imagine it trying to go up and rescue somebody at that upper floor? OK?,You can visualize this now; it's not impossible.,It's a very challenging task. But more to come later. 
 To finish: we've gotten design secrets from nature by looking at how feet are built.,We've learned we should distribute control to smart parts.,Don't put it all in the brain,,but put some of the control in tuned feet, legs and even body.,That nature uses hybrid solutions, not a single solution, to these problems,,and they're integrated and beautifully robust.,And third, we believe strongly that we do not want to mimic nature but instead be inspired by biology,,and use these novel principles with the best engineering solutions that are out there,to make -- potentially -- something better than nature. 
 So there's a clear message:,whether you care about a fundamental, basic research,of really interesting, bizarre, wonderful animals,,or you want to build a search-and-rescue robot,that can help you in an earthquake, or to save someone in a fire,,or you care about medicine, we must preserve nature's designs.,Otherwise these secrets will be lost forever.,Thank you.I'm used to thinking of the TED audience,as a wonderful collectionnof some of the most effective,,intelligent, intellectual, savvy,,worldly and innovativenpeople in the world.,And I think that's true.,However, I also have reason to believenthat many, if not most, of you,are actually tying your shoes incorrectly. 
 (Laughter) 
 Now I know that seems ludicrous.,I know that seems ludicrous.,And believe me, I lived the same sad lifenuntil about three years ago.,And what happened to me,was I bought, what was for me,na very expensive pair of shoes.,But those shoes camenwith round nylon laces,,and I couldn't keep them tied.,So I went back to the storenand said to the owner,,"I love the shoes, but I hate the laces.",He took a look and said,n"Oh, you're tying them wrong.",Now up until that moment,,I would have thought that, by age 50,,one of the life skillsnthat I had really nailed,was tying my shoes. 
 (Laughter) 
 But not so -- let me demonstrate. 
 This is the way,that most of usnwere taught to tie our shoes.,Now as it turns out -- thank you. 
 (Applause) 
 Wait, there's more.,As it turns out -- 
 (Laughter) 
 there's a strong formnand a weak form of this knot,,and we were taught the weak form.,And here's how to tell.,If you pull the strandsnat the base of the knot,,you will see that the bownwill orient itself,down the long axis of the shoe.,That's the weak form of the knot. 
 But not to worry.,If we start over,and simply go the other directionnaround the bow,,we get this, the strong form of the knot.,And if you pull the cords under the knot,,you will see that the bow orients itself,along the transverse axis of the shoe.,This is a stronger knot.,It will come untied less often.,It will let you down less,nand not only that, it looks better. 
 We're going to do this one more time. 
 (Applause) 
 Start as usual -- 
 (Applause) 
 go the other way around the loop.,This is a little hard for children,,but I think you can handle it.,Pull the knot.,There it is: the strong formnof the shoe knot. 
 Now, in keeping with today's theme,,I'd like to point out --nsomething you already know --,that sometimes a small advantagensomeplace in life,can yield tremendous resultsnsomeplace else. 
 (Laughter) 
 Live long and prosper. 
 (Applause)I get asked a lot what the differencenbetween my work is,and typical Pentagonnlong-range strategic planners.,And the answer I like to offer is,what they typically do is they thinknabout the future of wars,in the context of war.,And what I've spent 15 yearsndoing in this business --,and it's taken me almostn14 to figure it out --,is I think about the future of warsnin the context of everything else.,So I tend to specializenon the scene between war and peace.,The material I'm going to shownyou is one idea from a book,with a lot of ideas.,It's the one that takes menaround the world right now,interacting with foreignnmilitaries quite a bit.,The material was generatednin two years of work I did,for the Secretary of Defense,,thinking about a newnnational grand strategy,for the United States.,I'm going to present a problem,and try to give you an answer. 
 Here's my favorite bonehead conceptnfrom the 1990s in the Pentagon:,the theory of anti-access,narea-denial asymmetrical strategies.,Why do we call it that?,Because it's got all thosenA's lined up I guess.,This is gobbledygook for,if the United States fightsnsomebody we're going to be huge.,They're going to be small.,And if they try to fight usnin the traditional, straight-up manner,we're going to kick their ass,,which is why people don'tntry to do that any more.,I met the last Air ForcenGeneral who had actually,shot down an enemy plane in combat.,He's now a one star General.,That's how distantnwe are from even meeting an air force,willing to fly against ours.,So that overmatched capabilityncreates problems --,catastrophic successesnthe White House calls them. 
 (Laughter) 
 And we're trying to figure that out,,because it is an amazing capability.,The question is, what's the goodnyou can do with it?,OK?,The theory of anti-access, area-denialnasymmetrical strategies --,gobbledygook that we sell to Congress,,because if we just told themnwe can kick anybody's asses,they wouldn't buy usnall the stuff we want.,So we say, area-denial, anti-accessnasymmetrical strategies,and their eyes glaze over. 
 (Laughter) 
 And they say, "Will younbuild it in my district?" 
 (Laughter) 
 (Applause) 
 Here's my parody and it ain't much of one.,Let's talk about a battle space.,I don't know, Taiwan Straits 2025.,Let's talk about an enemy embeddednwithin that battle space.,I don't know, the Million Man Swim. 
 (Laughter) 
 The United States has to accessnthat battle space instantaneously.,They throw up anti-access,narea-denial asymmetrical strategies.,A banana peel on the tarmac. 
 (Laughter) 
 Trojan horses on our computer networks,reveal all our Achilles' heels instantly.,We say, "China, it's yours.",Prometheus approach, largelyna geographic definition,,focuses almost exclusivelynon the start of conflict.,We field the first-half team in a league,that insists on keeping scorenuntil the end of the game.,That's the problem.,We can run the score up against anybody,,and then get our assesnkicked in the second half --,what they call fourth generation warfare. 
 Here's the waynI like to describe it instead.,There is no battle space the U.S.nMilitary cannot access.,They said we couldn't do Afghanistan.nWe did it with ease.,They said we couldn't do Iraq.,We did it with 150 combatncasualties in six weeks.,We did it so fast we weren'tnprepared for their collapse.,There is nobody we can't take down.,The question is, what donyou do with the power? 
 So there's no troublenaccessing battle spaces.,What we have trouble accessingnis the transition space,that must naturally follow,,and creating the peace spacenthat allows us to move on.,Problem is, the DefensenDepartment over here,beats the hell out of you.,The State Department over here says,,"Come on boy, I know you can make it.",And that poor country runs off that ledge,,does that cartoon thing and then drops. 
 (Laughter) 
 This is not about overwhelmingnforce, but proportional force.,It's about non-lethal technologies,,because if you fire real ammo into a crowd,of women and children rioting,you're going to lose friends very quickly.,This is not about projectingnpower, but about staying power,,which is about legitimacy with the locals.,Who do you access in thisntransition space? 
 You have to create internal partners.nYou have to access coalition partners.,We asked the Indiansnfor 17,000 peace keepers.,I know their senior leadership,nthey wanted to give it to us.,But they said to us, "You know what?,In that transition space you'renmostly hat not enough cattle.,We don't think you can pull it off,,we're not going to give younour 17,000 peace keepers for fodder.",We asked the Russians for 40,000.,They said no.,I was in China in August, I said,,"You should have 50,000npeace keepers in Iraq.,It's your oil, not ours.",Which is the truth. It's their oil.,And the Chinese said to me, "Dr.nBarnett, you're absolutely right.,In a perfect world we'd have 50,000 there.,But it's not a perfect world,,and your administration isn'tngetting us any closer.",But we have troublenaccessing our outcomes. 
 We lucked out, frankly, on the selection.,We face different opponentsnacross these three.,And it's time to start admitting,you can't ask the same 19-year-oldnto do it all, day in and day out.,It's just too damn hard.,We have an unparalleledncapacity to wage war.,We don't do the everything else so well.,Frankly, we do it better than anybodynand we still suck at it.,We have a brilliant Secretary of War.,We don't have a Secretarynof Everything Else.,Because if we did, that guynwould be in front of the Senate,,still testifying over Abu Ghraib.,The problem is he doesn't exist.,There is no Secretary of Everything Else.,I think we have an unparalleledncapacity to wage war.,I call that the Leviathan Force.,What we need to build is a forcenfor the Everything Else.,I call them the System Administrators. 
 What I think this really represents,is lack of an A to Z rule setnfor the world as a whole,for processing politicallynbankrupt states.,We have one for processingneconomically bankrupt states.,It's the IMF SovereignnBankruptcy Plan, OK?,We argue about it every time we use it.,Argentina just went through it,nbroke a lot of rules.,They got out on the far end, we said,n"Fine, don't worry about it.",It's transparent. A certainnamount of certainty,gives the sense of a non-zero outcome.,We don't have one for processingnpolitically bankrupt states,that, frankly, everybody wants gone.,Like Saddam, like Mugabe,nlike Kim Jong-Il --,people who kill in hundredsnof thousands or millions.,Like the 250,000 dead so far in Sudan. 
 What would an A to Z system look like?,I'm going to distinguishnbetween what I call,front half and back half.,And let's call this red line,nI don't know, mission accomplished. 
 (Laughter) 
 (Applause) 
 What we have extant right now,,at the beginning of this system, is the U.N.nSecurity Council as a grand jury.,What can they do?,They can indict your ass.,They can debate it. They cannwrite it on a piece of paper.,They can put it in an envelopenand mail it to you,,and then say in no uncertainnterms, "Please cut that out." 
 (Laughter) 
 That gets you about four million deadnin Central Africa over the 1990s.,That gets you 250,000 deadnin the Sudan in the last 15 months.,Everybody's got to answerntheir grandchildren some day,what you didnabout the holocaust in Africa,,and you better have an answer.,We don't have anything to translatenthat will into action. 
 What we do have is the U.S.-enablednLeviathan Force that says,,"You want me to take that guy down?nI'll take that guy down.,I'll do it on Tuesday. It will costnyou 20 billion dollars." 
 (Laughter) 
 But here's the deal.,As soon as I can't findnanybody else to air out,,I leave the scene immediately.,That's called the Powell Doctrine.,Way downstream we haventhe International Criminal Court.,They love to put them on trial.nThey've got Milosevi right now. 
 What are we missing?,A functioning executiventhat will translate will into action,,because we don't have it.,Every time we lead one of these efforts,we have to whip ourselvesninto this imminent threat thing.,We haven't faced an imminent threat since,the Cuban missile crisis in 1962.,But we use this language from a bygone era,to scare ourselves into doing something,because we're a democracynand that's what it takes.,And if that doesn't worknwe scream, "He's got a gun!",just as we rush in. 
 (Laughter) 
 And then we look over the body,and we find an old cigarettenlighter and we say,,"Jesus, it was dark." 
 (Laughter) 
 Do you want to do it, France?,France says, "No, but I donlike to criticize you after the fact." 
 What we need downstreamnis a great power enabled --,what I call that Sys Admin Force.,We should have had 250,000ntroops streaming into Iraq,on the heels of that Leviathannsweeping towards Baghdad.,What do you get then?,No looting, no military disappearing,,no arms disappearing,nno ammo disappearing,,no Muqtada Al-Sadr -- I'mnwrecking his bones --,no insurgency.,Talk to anybody who was over therenin the first six months.,We had six months to feelnthe lob, to get the job done,,and we dicked around for six months.,And then they turned on us.,Why? Because they just got fed up.,They saw what we did to Saddam.,They said, "You're that powerful,nyou can resurrect this country.,You're America." 
 What we need is an internationalnreconstruction fund --,Sebastian Mallaby,nWashington Post, great idea.,Model on the IMF.,Instead of passing the hat each time, OK?,Where are we going to find this guy?nG20, that's easy.,Check out their agenda since 9/11.,All security dominated.,They're going to decide up frontnhow the money gets spent,just like in the IMF.,You vote according to how muchnmoney you put in the kitty.,Here's my challengento the Defense Department.,You've got to build this force.nYou've got to seed this force.,You've got to track coalition partners.nCreate a record of success.,You will get this model.,You tell me it's too hard to do.,I'll walk this dog rightnthrough that six part series on the Balkans.,We did it just like that.,I'm talking about regularizingnit, making it transparent.,Would you like Mugabe gone?,Would you like Kim Jong-Il,nwho's killed about two million people,,would you like him gone?,Would you like a better system?,This is why it matters to the military.,They've been experiencing an identityncrisis since the end of the Cold War.,I'm not talking about the differencenbetween reality and desire,,which I can do because I'mnnot inside the beltway. 
 (Laughter) 
 I'm talking about the 1990s.,The Berlin Wall falls. We do Desert Storm.,The split starts to emergenbetween those in the military,who see a future they can live with,,and those who see a futurenthat starts to scare them,,like the U.S. submarine community,,which watches the SovietnNavy disappear overnight.,Ah! 
 (Laughter) 
 So they start movingnfrom reality towards desire,and they create their own special language,to describe their voyage of self-discoverynand self-actualization. 
 (Laughter) 
 The problem is you need a big,nsexy opponent to fight against.,And if you can't findnone you've got to make one up.,China, all grown up, going to be a looker! 
 (Laughter) 
 The rest of the military gotndragged down into the muck,across the 1990s,and they developed this verynderisive term to describe it:,military operations other than war.,I ask you, who joins the militarynto do things other than war?,Actually, most of them.,Jessica Lynch nevernplanned on shooting back.,Most of them don't pick up a rifle.,I maintain this is codeninside the Army for,,"We don't want to do this.",They spent the 1990snworking the messy scene,between globalized parts of the world,What I call the core and the gap.,The Clinton administration wasn'tninterested in running this.,For eight years, after screwingnup the relationship on day one --,inauguration day with gaysnin the military --,which was deft. 
 (Laughter) 
 So we were home alone for eight years.,And what did we do home alone?,We bought one militarynand we operated another.,It's like the guy who goesnto the doctor and says,,"Doctor, it hurts when I do this." 
 (Laughter) 
 The doctor says, "Stopndoing that you idiot." 
 I used to give this briefninside the Pentagon in the early 1990s.,I'd say, "You're buying one militarynand you're operating another,,and eventually it's going to hurt.nIt's wrong.,Bad Pentagon, bad!" 
 (Laughter) 
 And they'd say, "Dr.nBarnett, you are so right.,Can you come back next yearnand remind us again?" 
 (Laughter) 
 Some people say 9/11 heals the rift --,jerks the long-term transformation gurus,out of their 30,000 foot view of history,,drags them down in to the muck and says,n"You want a networked opponent?,I've got one, he's everywhere,ngo find him.",It elevates MOOTW --nhow we pronounce that acronym --,from crap to grand strategy,,because that's how you'rengoing to shrink that gap. 
 Some people put these two things together,and they call it empire, which I thinknis a boneheaded concept.,Empire is about the enforcementnof not just minimal rule sets,,which you cannot do,,but maximum rule sets which you must do.,It's not our system of governance.,Never how we've sought to interactnwith the outside world.,I prefer that phrasenSystem Administration.,We enforce the minimal rule sets,for maintaining connectivitynto the global economy.,Certain bad things you cannot do.,How this impacts the way we thinknabout the future of war.,This is a concept which gets menvilified throughout the Pentagon.,It makes me very popular as well.,Everybody's got an opinion. 
 Going back to the beginningnof our country --,historically, defenses meantnprotection of the homeland.,Security has meant everything else.,Written into our constitution,,two different forces,ntwo different functions.,Raise an army when you need it,,and maintain a navynfor day-to-day connectivity.,A Department of War,na Department of Everything Else.,A big stick, a baton stick.,Can of whup ass,,the networking force.,In 1947 we merged thesentwo things together,in the Defense Department.,Our long-term rationale becomes,,we're involved in a hair triggernstand off with the Soviets.,To attack America is to risknblowing up the world.,We connected national securitynto international security,with about a seven minute time delay.,That's not our problem now.,They can killnthree million in Chicago tomorrow,and we don't gonto the mattresses with nukes.,That's the scary part. 
 The question is how do we reconnectnAmerican national security,with global security to makenthe world a lot more comfortable,,and to embed and contextualizenour employment,of force around the planet?,What's happenednsince is that bifurcation I described.,We talked about thisngoing all the way back,to the end of the Cold War.,Let's have a Department of War,nand a Department of Something Else.,Some people say, "Hell,n9/11 did it for you.",Now we've got a homengame and an away game. 
 (Laughter) 
 The Department of Homeland Securitynis a strategic feel good measure.,It's going to be the Departmentnof Agriculture for the 21st century.,TSA -- thousands standing around. 
 (Laughter) 
 I supported the war in Iraq.,He was a bad guy with multiple priors.,It's not like we had to find him,actually killing somebodynlive to arrest him.,I knew we'd kick ass in the warnwith the Leviathan Force.,I knew we'd have a hardntime with what followed.,But I know this organization doesn'tnchange until it experiences failure.,What do I mean by thesentwo different forces? 
 This is the Hobbesian Force.,I love this force. I don'tnwant to see it go.,That plus nukes rules out great power war.,This is the military the restnof the world wants us to build.,It's why I travel all over the worldntalking to foreign militaries. 
 What does this mean?,It means you've got to stop pretending,you can do these two very disparatenskill sets with the same 19-year-old.,Switching back, morning,nafternoon, evening,,morning, afternoon, evening.,Handing out aid, shooting back,,handing out aid, shooting back.,It's too much.,The 19-year-olds get tirednfrom the switching, OK? 
 (Laughter) 
 That force on the left, you canntrain a 19-year-old to do that.,That force on the right is morenlike a 40-year-old cop.,You need the experience.,What does this meannin terms of operations? 
 The rule is going to be this.,That Sys Admin force is the forcenthat never comes home,,does most of your work.,You break out that LeviathannForce only every so often.,But here's the promise younmake to the American public,,to your own people, to the world.,You break out that Leviathan Force,,you promise, you guaranteenthat you're going to mount,one hell of a -- immediatelyn-- follow-on Sys Admin effort.,Don't plan for the war unless younplan to win the peace. 
 (Applause) 
 Other differences. Leviathan,traditional partners,nthey all look like the Brits,and their former colonies. 
 (Laughter) 
 Including us, I would remind you.,The rest -- wider array of partners.,International organizations,nnon-governmental organizations,,private voluntarynorganizations, contractors.,You're not going to get away from that.,Leviathan Force, it's all about jointnoperations between the military services.,We're done with that.,What we need to donis inter-agency operations,,which frankly Condi Rice was in charge of.,And I'm amazed nobody asked hernthat question when she was confirmed. 
 I call the Leviathan Forcenyour dad's military.,I like them young, male,nunmarried, slightly pissed off. 
 (Laughter) 
 I call the Sys Admin Forcenyour mom's military.,It's everything the man's military hates.,Gender balanced much more, older,neducated, married with children.,The force on the left, up or out.,The force on the right, in and out.,The force on the left respectsnPosse Comitatus restrictions,on the use of force inside the U.S.,The force on the right's goingnto obliterate it.,That's where the NationalnGuard's going to be.,The force on the left is neverncoming under the purview,of the International Criminal Court.,Sys Admin Force has to.,Different definitionsnof network centricity.,One takes down networks, one puts them up.,And you've got to wage war herenin such a way to facilitate that. 
 Do we need a bigger budget?,Do we need a draft to pull this off?,Absolutely not.,I've been told by the Revolutionnof Military Affairs crowd for years,,we can do it faster, cheaper,nsmaller, just as lethal.,I say, "Great, I'm going to take the SysnAdmin budget out of your hide." 
 Here's the larger point.,You're going to build the Sys AdminnForce inside the U.S. Military first.,But ultimately you're goingnto civilianize it, probably two thirds.,Inter agency-ize it, internationalize it.,So yes, it begins inside the Pentagon,,but over time it's goingnto cross that river. 
 (Laughter) 
 I have been to the mountain top.nI can see the future.,I may not live long enough to get younthere, but it's going to happen.,We're going to havena Department of Something Else,between war and peace. 
 Last slide.,Who gets custody of the kids?,This is where the Marinesnin the audience get kind of tense.,(Laughter),And this is when they thinknabout beating the crap out of me,after the talk. 
 (Laughter) 
 Read Max Boon.,This is the history of the marinesn-- small wars, small arms.,The Marines are like my WestnHighland Terrier.,They get up every morning,nthey want to dig a hole,and they want to kill something. 
 (Laughter) 
 I don't want my Marines handing out aid.,I want them to be Marines.,That's what keeps the Sys AdminnForce from being a pussy force.,It keeps it from being the U.N.,You shoot at these people the Marinesnare going to come over and kill you. 
 (Laughter) 
 (Applause) 
 Department of Navy,nstrategic subs go this way,,surface combatants are over there,,and the news is they maynactually be that small. 
 (Laughter) 
 I call it the Smart Dust Navy.,I tell young officers, "You mayncommand 500 ships in your career.,Bad news is they may notnhave anybody on them.",Carriers go both waysnbecause they're a swing asset.,You'll see the pattern --nairborne, just like carriers.,Armor goes this way.,Here's the dirty secret of the Air Force,,you can win by bombing.,But you need lots of these guysnon the ground to win the peace.,Shinseki was right with the argument.,Air force, strategicnairlift goes both ways.,Bombers, fighters go over here.,Special Operations Command down at Tampa.,Trigger-pullers go this way.,Civil Affairs, that bastardnchild, comes over here.,Return to the Army.,The point about the trigger-pullersnand Special Operations Command.,No off season, thesenguys are always active.,They drop in, dontheir business, disappear.,See me now. Don't talk about it later. 
 (Laughter) 
 I was never here. 
 (Laughter) 
 The world is my playground. 
 (Laughter) 
 I want to keep trigger-pullersntrigger-happy.,I want the rules to benas loose as possible.,Because when the thingngets prevented in Chicago,with the three million dead,that perverts our politicalnsystem beyond all recognition,,these are the guys who are goingnto kill them first.,So it's better off to have themnmake some mistakes along the way,than to see that. 
 Reserve component --,National Guard reservesnoverwhelmingly Sys Admin.,How are you going to getnthem to work for this force?,Most firemen in thisncountry do it for free.,This is not about money.,This is about being up frontnwith these guys and gals. 
 Last point, intelligence community --,the muscle and the defensenagencies go this way.,What should be the CIA, open,nanalytical, open source,should come over here.,The information you neednto do this is not secret.,It's not secret.,Read that great piece in the New Yorker,about how our echo boomers,n19 to 25, over in Iraq,taught each othernhow to do Sys Admin work,,over the Internet in chat rooms.,They said, "Al Qaeda could be listening.",They said, "Well, Jesus,nthey already know this stuff." 
 (Laughter) 
 Take a gift in the left hand.,These are the sunglasses that don'tnscare people, simple stuff.,Censors and transparency,nthe overheads go in both directions. 
 Thanks.I am a vicar in the Church of England.,I've been a priest in the Church for 20 years.,For most of that time, I've been struggling and grappling,with questions about the nature of God. Who is God?,And I'm very aware that when you say the word "God,",many people will turn off immediately.,And most people, both within and outside the organized church,,still have a picture of a celestial controller,,a rule maker, a policeman in the sky who orders everything,,and causes everything to happen.,He will protect his own people,,and answer the prayers of the faithful. 
 And in the worship of my church,,the most frequently used adjective about God is "almighty.",But I have a problem with that.,I have become more and more uncomfortable,with this perception of God over the years.,Do we really believe that God is the kind of male boss that we've been presenting,in our worship and in our liturgies over all these years? 
 Of course, there have been thinkers,who have suggested different ways of looking at God.,Exploring the feminine, nurturing side of divinity.,Suggesting that God expresses Himself or Herself through powerlessness,,rather than power.,Acknowledging that God is unknown and unknowable by definition.,Finding deep resonances with other religions and philosophies,and ways of looking at life as part of what is a universal and global search for meaning.,These ideas are well known in liberal academic circles,,but clergy like myself have been reluctant to air them,,for fear of creating tension and division in our church communities,,for fear of upsetting the simple faith of more traditional believers.,I have chosen not to rock the boat. 
 Then, on December 26th last year, just two months ago,,that underwater earthquake triggered the tsunami.,And two weeks later, Sunday morning, 9th of January,,I found myself standing in front of my congregation --,intelligent, well meaning, mostly thoughtful Christian people --,and I needed to express, on their behalf, our feelings and our questions.,I had my own personal responses, but I also have a public role,,and something needed to be said.,And this is what I said. 
 Shortly after the tsunami I read a newspaper article,written by the Archbishop of Canterbury -- fine title --,about the tragedy in Southern Asia.,The essence of what he said was this:,the people most affected by the devastation and loss of life,do not want intellectual theories about how God let this happen.,He wrote, "If some religious genius did come up with an explanation,of exactly why all these deaths made sense,,would we feel happier, or safer, or more confident in God?" 
 If the man in the photograph that appeared in the newspapers,,holding the hand of his dead child was standing in front of us now,,there are no words that we could say to him.,A verbal response would not be appropriate.,The only appropriate response would be a compassionate silence,and some kind of practical help.,It isn't a time for explanation, or preaching, or theology;,it's a time for tears. 
 This is true. And yet here we are, my church in Oxford,,semi-detached from events that happened a long way away,,but with our faith bruised.,And we want an explanation from God.,We demand an explanation from God.,Some have concluded that we can only believe in a God who shares our pain.,In some way, God must feel the anguish, and grief,,and physical pain that we feel.,In some way the eternal God must be able to enter into the souls of human beings,and experience the torment within.,And if this is true, it must also be that God knows the joy and exaltation,of the human spirit, as well.,We want a God who can weep with those who weep,,and rejoice with those who rejoice. 
 This seems to me both a deeply moving and a convincing re-statement,of Christian belief about God.,For hundreds of years, the prevailing orthodoxy, the accepted truth,,was that God the Father, the Creator, is unchanging,and therefore by definition cannot feel pain or sadness.,Now the unchanging God feels a bit cold and indifferent to me.,And the devastating events of the 20th century,have forced people to question the cold, unfeeling God.,The slaughter of millions in the trenches and in the death camps,have caused people to ask, "Where is God in all this?,Who is God in all this?" 
 And the answer was, "God is in this with us,,or God doesn't deserve our allegiance anymore.",If God is a bystander, observing but not involved,,then God may well exist, but we don't want to know about Him.,Many Jews and Christians now feel like this, I know.,And I am among them. 
 So we have a suffering God --,a God who is intimately connected with this world and with every living soul.,I very much relate to this idea of God.,But it isn't enough. I need to ask some more questions,,and I hope they are questions that you will want to ask, as well,,some of you. 
 Over the last few weeks I have been struck by the number of times,that words in our worship have felt a bit inappropriate, a bit dodgy.,We have a pram service on Tuesday mornings for mums and their pre-school children.,And last week we sang with the children one of their favorite songs,,"The Wise Man Built His House Upon the Rock.",Perhaps some of you know it. Some of the words go like this:,"The foolish man built his house upon the sand /,And the floods came up / And the house on the sand went crash.",Then in the same week, at a funeral,,we sang the familiar hymn "We Plow the Fields and Scatter,",a very English hymn.,In the second verse comes the line, "The wind and waves obey Him.",Do they? I don't feel we can sing that song again in church,,after what's happened. 
 So the first big question is about control.,Does God have a plan for each of us? Is God in control?,Does God order each moment? Does the wind and the waves obey Him?,From time to time,,one hears Christians telling the story of how God organized things for them,,so that everything worked out all right --,some difficulty overcome, some illness cured, some trouble averted,,a parking space found at a crucial time.,I can remember someone saying this to me,,with her eyes shining with enthusiasm at this wonderful confirmation of her faith,and the goodness of God. 
 But if God can or will do these things --,intervene to change the flow of events --,then surely he could have stopped the tsunami.,Do we have a local God who can do little things like parking spaces,,but not big things like 500 mile-per-hour waves?,That's just not acceptable to intelligent Christians,,and we must acknowledge it.,Either God is responsible for the tsunami,,or God is not in control. 
 After the tragedy, survival stories began to emerge.,You probably heard some of them:,the man who surfed the wave,,the teenage girl who recognized the danger,because she had just been learning about tsunamis at school.,Then there was the congregation who had left their usual church building on the shore,to hold a service in the hills.,The preacher delivered an extra long sermon,,so that they were still out of harm's way when the wave struck.,Afterwards someone said that God must have been looking after them. 
 So the next question is about partiality.,Can we earn God's favor by worshipping Him or believing in Him?,Does God demand loyalty, like any medieval tyrant?,A God who looks after His own, so that Christians are OK,,while everyone else perishes?,A cosmic us and them, and a God who is guilty of the worst kind of favoritism?,That would be appalling,,and that would be the point at which I would hand in my membership.,Such a God would be morally inferior to the highest ideals of humanity. 
 So who is God, if not the great puppet-master or the tribal protector?,Perhaps God allows or permits terrible things to happen,,so that heroism and compassion can be shown.,Perhaps God is testing us: testing our charity, or our faith.,Perhaps there is a great, cosmic plan that allows for horrible suffering,so that everything will work out OK in the end.,Perhaps, but these ideas are all just variations on God controlling everything,,the supreme commander toying with expendable units in a great campaign.,We are still left with a God who can do the tsunami and allow Auschwitz. 
 In his great novel, "The Brothers Karamazov," Dostoevsky gives these words to Ivan,,addressed to his naive and devout younger brother, Alyosha:,"If the sufferings of children go to make up the sum of sufferings,which is necessary for the purchase of truth,,then I say beforehand that the entire truth is not worth such a price.,We cannot afford to pay so much for admission.,It is not God that I do not accept.,I merely, most respectfully, return Him the ticket." 
 Or perhaps God set the whole universe going at the beginning,and then relinquished control forever,,so that natural processes could occur, and evolution run its course.,This seems more acceptable,,but it still leaves God with the ultimate moral responsibility.,Is God a cold, unfeeling spectator?,Or a powerless lover, watching with infinite compassion,things God is unable to control or change?,Is God intimately involved in our suffering,,so that He feels it in His own being? 
 If we believe something like this, we must let go of the puppet-master completely,,take our leave of the almighty controller, abandon traditional models.,We must think again about God.,Maybe God doesn't do things at all.,Maybe God isn't an agent like all of us are agents.,Early religious thought conceived God as a sort of superhuman person,,doing things all over the place.,Beating up the Egyptians, drowning them in the Red Sea, wasting cities, getting angry.,The people knew their God by His mighty acts. 
 But what if God doesn't act? What if God doesn't do things at all?,What if God is in things?,The loving soul of the universe.,An in-dwelling compassionate presence, underpinning and sustaining all things.,What if God is in things?,In the infinitely complex network of relationships and connections that make up life.,In the natural cycle of life and death,,the creation and destruction that must happen continuously.,In the process of evolution.,In the incredible intricacy and magnificence of the natural world.,In the collective unconscious, the soul of the human race.,In you, in me, mind and body and spirit.,In the tsunami, in the victims. In the depth of things.,In presence and in absence. In simplicity and complexity.,In change and development and growth. 
 How does this in-ness, this innerness, this interiority of God work?,It's hard to conceive, and begs more questions.,Is God just another name for the universe,,with no independent existence at all?,I don't know.,To what extent can we ascribe personality to God?,I don't know.,In the end, we have to say, "I don't know.",If we knew, God would not be God. 
 To have faith in this God,would be more like trusting an essential benevolence in the universe,,and less like believing a system of doctrinal statements.,Isn't it ironic that Christians who claim to believe,in an infinite, unknowable being,then tie God down in closed systems and rigid doctrines? 
 How could one practice such a faith?,By seeking the God within. By cultivating my own inwardness.,In silence, in meditation, in my inner space, in the me that remains,when I gently put aside my passing emotions and ideas and preoccupations.,In awareness of the inner conversation. 
 And how would we live such a faith? How would I live such a faith?,By seeking intimate connection with your inwardness.,The kind of relationships when deep speaks to deep.,If God is in all people, then there is a meeting place,where my relationship with you becomes a three-way encounter.,There is an Indian greeting, which I'm sure some of you know:,"Namaste," accompanied by a respectful bow,,which, roughly translated means,,"That which is of God in me greets that which of God is in you.",Namaste. 
 And how would one deepen such a faith?,By seeking the inwardness which is in all things.,In music and poetry, in the natural world of beauty,and in the small ordinary things of life,,there is a deep, indwelling presence that makes them extraordinary.,It needs a profound attentiveness and a patient waiting,,a contemplative attitude and a generosity and openness,to those whose experience is different from my own. 
 When I stood up to speak to my people about God and the tsunami,,I had no answers to offer them.,No neat packages of faith, with Bible references to prove them.,Only doubts and questioning and uncertainty.,I had some suggestions to make --,possible new ways of thinking about God.,Ways that might allow us to go on, down a new and uncharted road.,But in the end, the only thing I could say for sure was, "I don't know,",and that just might be the most profoundly religious statement of all. 
 Thank you.Zach Kaplan: Keith and I lead a research team.,We investigate materials and technologies,that have unexpected properties. Over the last three years,,we found over 200 of these things, and so we looked,back into our library and selected six we thought would be most,surprising for TED.,Of these six, the first one that we're going to talk about,is in the black envelope you're holding.,It comes from a company in Japan called GelTech. Now go ahead and open it up. 
 Keith Schacht: Now be sure and take the two pieces apart.,What's unexpected about this is that it's soft, but it's also a strong magnet.,Zach and I have always been fascinated,observing unexpected things like this.,We spent a long time thinking about why this is, and it's just recently that we realized:,it's when we see something unexpected,,it changes our understanding of the way things work.,As you're seeing this gel magnet for the first time,,if you assume that all magnets had to be hard,,then seeing this surprised you and it changed your understanding,of the way magnets could work. 
 ZK: Now, it's important to understand what the unexpected properties are.,But to really think about the implications of what this makes possible,,we found that it helps to think about how it could be applied in the world.,So, a first idea is to use it on cabinet doors.,If you line the sides of the cabinets using the gel material --,if a cabinet slams shut it wouldn't make a loud noise,,and in addition the magnets would draw the cabinets closed.,Imagine taking the same material, but putting it on the bottom of a sneaker.,You know, this way you could go to the container store and buy one of those,metal sheets that they hang on the back of your door, in your closet,,and you could literally stick your shoes up instead of using a shelf.,For me, I really love this idea.,(Laughter),If you come to my apartment and see my closet,,I'm sure you'd figure out why: it's a mess. 
 KS: Seeing the unexpected properties and then seeing a couple of,applications -- it helps you see why this is significant, what the potential is.,But we've found that the way we present our ideas,it makes a big difference. 
 ZK: It was like six months ago that Keith and I were out in L.A.,,and we were at Starbucks having coffee with Roman Coppola.,He works on mostly music videos and commercials,with his company, The Directors Bureau.,As we were talking, Roman told us that he's kind of an inventor on the side.,And we were showing him the same,gel magnet that you're holding in your hand -- and you know,,we shared the same ideas. And you could see it in his face:,Roman starts to get really excited and he whips out this manila folder;,he opens it up and Keith and I look in,,and he starts showing us concepts that he's been working on.,These things just get him really excited. And so we're looking,at these concepts, and we were just like, whoa, this guy's good.,Because the way that he presented the concept -- his approach,was totally different than ours. He sold it to you as if it was for sale right now.,When we were going in the car back to the airport,,we were thinking: why was this so powerful?,And as we thought about it more, we realized that,it let you fill in all the details about the experience,,just as if you saw it on TV. So, for TED we decided to take our favorite,idea for the gel magnet and work with Roman and his team,at the Directors Bureau to create a commercial for a product,from the future. 
 Narrator: Do you have a need for speed?,Inventables Water Adventures dares you to launch yourself,on a magnetically-levitating board down a waterslide,so fast, so tall, that when you hit the bottom, it uses brakes to stop.,Aqua Rocket: coming this summer. 
 KS: Now, we showed the concept to a few people before this,,and they asked us, when's it coming out?,So I just wanted to let you know, it's not actually coming out,,just the concept is. 
 ZK: So now, when we dream up these concepts, it's important for us,to make sure that they work from a technical standpoint.,So I just want to quickly explain how this would work.,This is the magnetically-levitating board that they mentioned in the commercial.,The gel that you're holding would be lining the bottom of the board.,Now this is important for two reasons.,One: the soft properties of the magnet that make it so that, if it were,to hit the rider in the head, it wouldn't injure him.,In addition, you can see from the diagram on the right,,the underpart of the slide would be an electromagnet.,So this would actually repel the rider a little bit as you're going down.,The force of the water rushing down, in addition to that repulsion force,,would make this slide go faster than any slide on the market.,It's because of this that you need the magnetic braking system.,When you get to the very bottom of the slide --,(Laughter),-- the rider passes through an aluminum tube.,And I'm going to kick it to Keith to explain why that's important,from a technical standpoint. 
 KS: So I'm sure all you engineers know that even though aluminum is,a metal, it's not a magnetic material. But something unexpected,happens when you drop a magnet down an aluminum tube.,So we set up a quick experiment here to show that to you.,(Laughter),Now, you see the magnet fell really slowly.,Now, I'm not going to get into the physics of it,,but all you need to know is that the faster the magnet's falling,,the greater the stopping force. 
 ZK: Now, our next technology is actually a 10-foot pole,,and I have it right here in my pocket.,(Laughter),There're a few different versions of it.,(Laughter),KS: Some of them automatically unroll like this one.,They can be made to automatically roll up, or they can be made,stable, like Zach's, to hold any position in between. 
 ZK: As we were talking to the vendor -- to try to learn about,how you could apply these, or how they're being applied currently --,he was telling us that, in the military they use this one,so soldiers can keep it on their chests -- very concealed --,and then, when they're out on the field, erect it as an antenna,to clearly send signals back to the base.,In our brainstorms, we came up with the idea you could use it for a soccer goal:,so at the end of the game, you just roll up the goal and put it in your gym bag.,(Laughter) 
 KS: Now, the interesting thing about this is,,you don't have to be an engineer to appreciate why,a 10-foot pole that can fit in your pocket is so interesting.,(Laughter),So we decided to go out onto the streets of Chicago,and ask a few people on the streets what they thought you could do with this. 
 Man: I clean my ceiling fans with that and I get the spider webs,off my house -- I do it that way.,Woman: I'd make my very own walking stick.,Woman: I would create a ladder to use to get up on top of the tree.,Woman: An olive server.,Man: Some type of extension pole -- like what the painters use.,Woman: I would make a spear that, when you went deep sea diving,,you could catch the fish really fast, and then roll it back up,,and you could swim easier ... Yeah.,(Laughter) 
 ZK: Now, for our next technology we're going to do a little demonstration,,and so we need a volunteer from the audience.,You sir, come on up.,(Laughter),Come on up. Tell everybody your name. 
 Steve Jurvetson: Steve. 
 ZK: It's Steve. All right Steve, now, follow me.,We need you to stand right in front of the TED sign.,Right there. That's great.,And hold onto this. Good luck to you.,(Laughter) 
 KS: No, not yet.,(Laughter) 
 ZK: I'd just like to let you all know that this presentation,has been brought to you by Target. 
 KS: Little bit -- that's perfect, just perfect.,Now, Zach, we're going to demonstrate,a water gun fight from the future.,(Laughter),So here, come on up to the front. All right, so,now if you'll see here -- no, no, it's OK.,So, describe to the audience the temperature of your shirt. Go ahead. 
 SJ: It's cold. 
 KS: Now the reason it's cold is that's it's not actually water loaded,into these squirt guns -- it's a dry liquid developed by 3M.,It's perfectly clear, it's odorless, it's colorless.,It's so safe you could drink this stuff.,(Laughter),And the reason it feels cold is because it evaporates,25 times faster than water.,(Laughter),All right, well thanks for coming up.,(Laughter) 
 ZK: Wait, wait, Steven -- before you go we filled this with the dry liquid,so during the break you can shoot your friends.,SJ: Excellent, thank you. 
 KS: Thanks for coming up. Let's give him a big round of applause.,(Applause) 
 So what's the significance of this dry liquid?,Early versions of the fluid were actually used on a Cray Supercomputer.,Now, the unexpected thing about this,is that Zach could stand up on stage and drench,a perfectly innocent member of the audience without any concern,that we'd damage the electronics, that we'd get him wet,,that we'd hurt the books or the computers. It works because it's non-conductive.,So you can see here, you can immerse a whole circuit board,in this and it wouldn't cause any damage.,You can circulate it to draw the heat away.,But today it's most widely used in office buildings --,in the sprinkler system -- as a fire-suppression fluid.,Again, it's perfectly safe for people. It puts out the fires, doesn't hurt anything.,But our favorite idea for this,was using it in a basketball game. So during halftime,,it could rain down on the players, cool everyone down,,and in a matter of minutes it would dry. Wouldn't hurt the court. 
 ZK: Our next technology comes to us from a company in Japan,called Sekisui Chemical. One of their R&D engineers,was working on a way to make plastic stiffer.,While he was doing this, he noticed an unexpected thing.,We have a video to show you. 
 KS: So you see there, it didn't bounce back. Now, this was,an unintended side effect of some experiments they were doing.,It's technically called, "shape-retaining property.",Now, think about your interactions with aluminum foil.,Shape-retaining is common in metal: you bend a piece of aluminum foil,,and it holds its place. Contrast that with,a plastic garbage can -- and you can push in the sides,and it always bounces back. 
 ZK: For example, you could make a watch that wraps around your wrist,,but doesn't use a buckle.,Taking it a little further, if you wove,those strips together -- kind of like a little basket -- you could make,a shape-retaining sheet, and then you could embed it in a cloth:,so you could make a picnic sheet that wraps around the table,,so that way on a windy day it wouldn't blow away.,For our next technology, it's hard to observe,the unexpected property by itself, because it's an ink.,So, we've prepared a video to show it applied to paper. 
 KS: As this paper is bending, the resistance of the ink changes.,So with simple electronics, you can detect how much the page is being bent.,Now, to think about the potential for this,,think of all the places ink is supplied: on business cards,,on the back of cereal boxes, board games. Any place you use ink,,you could change the way you interact with it. 
 ZK: So my favorite idea for this is to apply the ink to a book.,This could totally change the way that you interface with paper.,You see the dark line on the side and the top. As you turn the pages,of the book, the book can actually detect what page you're on,,based on the curvature of the pages.,In addition, if you were to fold in one of the corners, then you could program,the book to actually email you the text on the page for your notes. 
 KS: For our last technology, we worked again with Roman and his team,at the Directors Bureau to develop a commercial from the future,to explain how it works. 
 Old Milk Carton: Oh yeah, it smells good.,Who are you?,New Milk Carton: I'm New Milk.,OMC: I used to smell like you.,Narrator: Fresh Watch, from Inventables Dairy Farms.,Packaging that changes color when your milk's gone off.,Don't let milk spoil your morning. 
 ZK: Now, this technology was developed by these two guys:,Professor Ken Suslick and Neil Rakow, of the University of Illinois. 
 KS: Now the way it works: there's a matrix of color dyes.,And these dyes change color in response to odors.,So the smell of vanilla, that might change the four on the left to brown,and the one on the right to yellow. This matrix can produce,thousands of different color combinations to represent thousands of different smells.,But like in the milk commercial, if you know what odor you want to detect,,then they can formulate a specific dye to detect just that odor. 
 ZK: Right. It was that that started a conversation with Professor Suslick and myself,,and he was explaining to me the things that this is making possible,,beyond just detecting spoiled food. It's really where the significance of it lies.,His company actually did a survey of firemen all across the country to try to learn,,how are they currently testing the air when they respond to an emergency scene?,And he kind of comically explained that,time after time, what the firemen would say is:,they would rush to the scene of the crime; they would look around;,if there were no dead policemen, it was OK to go.,(Laughter),I mean, this is a true story. They're using policemen as canaries.,(Laughter),But more seriously, they determined that you could develop,a device that can smell better than the humans,,and say if it's safe for the firemen.,In addition, he's spun off a company from the University called ChemSensing,,where they're working on medical equipment.,So, a patient can come in and actually blow into their device.,By detecting the odor of particular bacteria, or viruses,,or even lung cancer, the dots will change and they can use,software to analyze the results.,This can radically improve the way that doctors diagnose patients.,Currently, they're using a method of trial and error,,but this could tell you precisely what disease you have. 
 KS: So that was the six we had for you today, but I hope you're starting to see,why we find these things so fascinating.,Because every one of these six changed our understanding,of what was possible in the world. Prior to seeing this,,we would have assumed: a 10-foot pole couldn't fit in your pocket;,something as inexpensive as ink couldn't sense the way paper is being bent;,every one of these things -- and we're constantly trying to find more. 
 ZK: This is something that Keith and I really enjoy doing.,I'm sure it's obvious to you now, but it was actually yesterday,that I was reminded of why. I was having a conversation,with Steve Jurvetson, over downstairs by the escalators,,and he was telling me that when Chris sent out that little box,,one of the items in it was the hydrophobic sand --,the sand that doesn't get wet. He said that he was playing with it with his son.,And you know, his son was mesmerized,,because he would dunk it in the water, he would take it out,and it was bone dry. A few weeks later, he said that his son,was playing with a lock of his mother's hair, and he noticed,that there were some drops of water on the hair.,And he took the thing and he looked up to Steve and he said,,"Look, hydrophobic string.",(Laughter),I mean, after hearing that story -- that really summed it up for me.,Thank you very much. 
 KS: Thank you.,(Applause)In 1962, with Rachel Carson's "Silent Spring,",I think for people like me in the world of the making of things,,the canary in the mine wasn't singing.,And so the question that we might not have birds,became kind of fundamental to those of us wandering around,looking for the meadowlarks that seemed to have all disappeared.,And the question was, were the birds singing?,Now, I'm not a scientist, that'll be really clear.,But, you know, we've just come from this discussion of what a bird might be.,What is a bird?,Well, in my world, this is a rubber duck.,It comes in California with a warning --,"This product contains chemicals known by the State of California,to cause cancer and birth defects or other reproductive harm.",This is a bird.,What kind of culture would produce a product of this kind,and then label it and sell it to children?,I think we have a design problem. 
 Someone heard the six hours of talk that I gave,called "The Monticello Dialogues" on NPR, and sent me this as a thank you note --,"We realize that design is a signal of intention,,but it also has to occur within a world,,and we have to understand that world in order to,imbue our designs with inherent intelligence,,and so as we look back at the basic state of affairs,in which we design, we, in a way, need to go to the primordial condition,to understand the operating system and the frame conditions of a planet,,and I think the exciting part of that is the good news that's there,,because the news is the news of abundance,,and not the news of limits,,and I think as our culture tortures itself now,with tyrannies and concerns over limits and fear,,we can add this other dimension of abundance that is coherent,,driven by the sun, and start to imagine,what that would be like to share.",That was a nice thing to get.,That was one sentence.,Henry James would be proud.,This is -- I put it down at the bottom,,but that was extemporaneous, obviously. 
 The fundamental issue is that, for me,,design is the first signal of human intentions.,So what are our intentions, and what would our intentions be --,if we wake up in the morning, we have designs on the world --,well, what would our intention be as a species,now that we're the dominant species?,And it's not just stewardship and dominion debate,,because really, dominion is implicit in stewardship --,because how could you dominate something you had killed?,And stewardship's implicit in dominion,,because you can't be steward of something if you can't dominate it. 
 So the question is, what is the first question for designers?,Now, as guardians -- let's say the state, for example,,which reserves the right to kill, the right to be duplicitous and so on --,the question we're asking the guardian at this point is,are we meant, how are we meant,,to secure local societies, create world peace,and save the environment?,But I don't know that that's the common debate. 
 Commerce, on the other hand, is relatively quick,,essentially creative, highly effective and efficient,,and fundamentally honest, because we can't exchange,value for very long if we don't trust each other.,So we use the tools of commerce primarily for our work,,but the question we bring to it is,,how do we love all the children of all species for all time?,And so we start our designs with that question.,Because what we realize today is that modern culture,appears to have adopted a strategy of tragedy.,If we come here and say, "Well, I didn't intend,to cause global warming on the way here,",and we say, "That's not part of my plan,",then we realize it's part of our de facto plan.,Because it's the thing that's happening because we have no other plan. 
 And I was at the White House for President Bush,,meeting with every federal department and agency,,and I pointed out that they appear to have no plan.,If the end game is global warming, they're doing great.,If the end game is mercury toxification of our children,downwind of coal fire plants as they scuttled the Clean Air Act,,then I see that our education programs should be explicitly defined as,,"Brain death for all children. No child left behind." 
 (Applause) 
 So, the question is, how many federal officials,are ready to move to Ohio and Pennsylvania with their families?,So if you don't have an endgame of something delightful,,then you're just moving chess pieces around,,if you don't know you're taking the king.,So perhaps we could develop a strategy of change,,which requires humility. And in my business as an architect,,it's unfortunate the word "humility" and the word "architect",have not appeared in the same paragraph since "The Fountainhead.",So if anybody here has trouble with the concept of design humility,,reflect on this -- it took us 5,000 years,to put wheels on our luggage.,So, as Kevin Kelly pointed out, there is no endgame.,There is an infinite game, and we're playing in that infinite game.,And so we call it "cradle to cradle,",and our goal is very simple. 
 This is what I presented to the White House.,Our goal is a delightfully diverse, safe, healthy and just world,,with clean air, clean water, soil and power --,economically, equitably, ecologically and elegantly enjoyed, period. 
 (Applause) 
 What don't you like about this?,Which part of this don't you like?,So we realized we want full diversity,,even though it can be difficult to remember what De Gaulle said,when asked what it was like to be President of France.,He said, "What do you think it's like trying to run a country with 400 kinds of cheese?",But at the same time, we realize that our products are not safe and healthy. 
 So we've designed products,and we analyzed chemicals down to the parts per million.,This is a baby blanket by Pendleton that will give your child nutrition,instead of Alzheimer's later in life.,We can ask ourselves, what is justice,,and is justice blind, or is justice blindness?,And at what point did that uniform turn from white to black?,Water has been declared a human right by the United Nations.,Air quality is an obvious thing to anyone who breathes.,Is there anybody here who doesn't breathe?,Clean soil is a critical problem -- the nitrification, the dead zones,in the Gulf of Mexico.,A fundamental issue that's not being addressed.,We've seen the first form of solar energy,that's beat the hegemony of fossil fuels in the form of wind,here in the Great Plains, and so that hegemony is leaving.,And if we remember Sheikh Yamani when he formed OPEC,,they asked him, "When will we see the end of the age of oil?",I don't know if you remember his answer, but it was,,"The Stone Age didn't end because we ran out of stones.",We see that companies acting ethically in this world,are outperforming those that don't.,We see the flows of materials in a rather terrifying prospect.,This is a hospital monitor from Los Angeles, sent to China.,This woman will expose herself to toxic phosphorous,,release four pounds of toxic lead into her childrens' environment,,which is from copper. 
 On the other hand, we see great signs of hope.,Here's Dr. Venkataswamy in India, who's figured out,how to do mass-produced health.,He has given eyesight to two million people for free.,We see in our material flows that car steels don't become car steel again,because of the contaminants of the coatings --,bismuth, antimony, copper and so on.,They become building steel.,On the other hand, we're working with Berkshire Hathaway,,Warren Buffett and Shaw Carpet,,the largest carpet company in the world.,We've developed a carpet that is continuously recyclable,,down to the parts per million.,The upper is Nylon 6 that can go back to caprolactam,,the bottom, a polyolephine -- infinitely recyclable thermoplastic.,Now if I was a bird, the building on my left is a liability.,The building on my right, which is our corporate campus for The Gap,with an ancient meadow, is an asset -- its nesting grounds. 
 Here's where I come from. I grew up in Hong Kong,,with six million people in 40 square miles.,During the dry season, we had four hours of water every fourth day.,And the relationship to landscape was that of farmers who have been,farming the same piece of ground for 40 centuries.,You can't farm the same piece of ground for 40 centuries,without understanding nutrient flow.,My childhood summers were in the Puget Sound of Washington,,among the first growth and big growth.,My grandfather had been a lumberjack in the Olympics,,so I have a lot of tree karma I am working off.,I went to Yale for graduate school,,studied in a building of this style by Le Corbusier,,affectionately known in our business as Brutalism.,If we look at the world of architecture,,we see with Mies' 1928 tower for Berlin,,the question might be, "Well, where's the sun?",And this might have worked in Berlin, but we built it in Houston,,and the windows are all closed. And with most products,appearing not to have been designed for indoor use,,this is actually a vertical gas chamber. 
 When I went to Yale, we had the first energy crisis,,and I was designing the first solar-heated house in Ireland,as a student, which I then built --,which would give you a sense of my ambition.,And Richard Meier, who was one of my teachers,,kept coming over to my desk to give me criticism,,and he would say, "Bill, you've got to understand- --,solar energy has nothing to do with architecture.",I guess he didn't read Vitruvius.,In 1984, we did the first so-called "green office" in America,for Environmental Defense.,We started asking manufacturers what were in their materials.,They said, "They're proprietary, they're legal, go away.",The only indoor quality work done in this country at that time,was sponsored by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company,,and it was to prove there was no danger,from secondhand smoke in the workplace. 
 So, all of a sudden, here I am, graduating from high school in 1969,,and this happens, and we realize that "away" went away.,Remember we used to throw things away, and we'd point to away?,And yet, NOAA has now shown us, for example --,you see that little blue thing above Hawaii?,That's the Pacific Gyre.,It was recently dragged for plankton by scientists,,and they found six times as much plastic as plankton.,When asked, they said, "It's kind of like a giant toilet that doesn't flush.",Perhaps that's away.,So we're looking for the design rules of this --,this is the highest biodiversity of trees in the world, Irian Jaya,,259 species of tree, and we described this,in the book, "Cradle to Cradle.",The book itself is a polymer. It is not a tree.,That's the name of the first chapter -- "This Book is Not a Tree.",Because in poetics, as Margaret Atwood pointed out,,"we write our history on the skin of fish,with the blood of bears.",And with so much polymer, what we really need,is technical nutrition, and to use something,as elegant as a tree -- imagine this design assignment:,Design something that makes oxygen, sequesters carbon,,fixes nitrogen, distills water, accrues solar energy as fuel,,makes complex sugars and food, creates microclimates,,changes colors with the seasons and self-replicates.,Well, why don't we knock that down and write on it? 
 (Laughter) 
 So, we're looking at the same criteria,as most people -- you know, can I afford it?,Does it work? Do I like it?,We're adding the Jeffersonian agenda, and I come from Charlottesville,,where I've had the privilege of living in a house designed by Thomas Jefferson.,We're adding life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.,Now if we look at the word "competition,",I'm sure most of you've used it.,You know, most people don't realize it comes from,the Latin competere, which means strive together.,It means the way Olympic athletes train with each other.,They get fit together, and then they compete.,The Williams sisters compete -- one wins Wimbledon.,So we've been looking at the idea of competition,as a way of cooperating in order to get fit together.,And the Chinese government has now --,I work with the Chinese government now --,has taken this up.,We're also looking at survival of the fittest,,not in just competition terms in our modern context,of destroy the other or beat them to the ground,,but really to fit together and build niches,and have growth that is good. 
 Now most environmentalists don't say growth is good,,because, in our lexicon, asphalt is two words: assigning blame.,But if we look at asphalt as our growth,,then we realize that all we're doing is destroying,the planetary's fundamental underlying operating system.,So when we see E equals mc squared come along, from a poet's perspective,,we see energy as physics, chemistry as mass,,and all of a sudden, you get this biology.,And we have plenty of energy, so we'll solve that problem,,but the biology problem's tricky, because as we put through,all these toxic materials that we disgorge,,we will never be able to recover that.,And as Francis Crick pointed out, nine years,after discovering DNA with Mr. Watson,,that life itself has to have growth as a precondition --,it has to have free energy, sunlight,and it needs to be an open system of chemicals.,So we're asking for human artifice to become a living thing,,and we want growth, we want free energy from sunlight,and we want an open metabolism for chemicals.,Then, the question becomes not growth or no growth,,but what do you want to grow?,So instead of just growing destruction,,we want to grow the things that we might enjoy,,and someday the FDA will allow us to make French cheese. 
 So therefore, we have these two metabolisms,,and I worked with a German chemist, Michael Braungart,,and we've identified the two fundamental metabolisms.,The biological one I'm sure you understand,,but also the technical one, where we take materials,and put them into closed cycles.,We call them biological nutrition and technical nutrition.,Technical nutrition will be in an order of magnitude of biological nutrition.,Biological nutrition can supply about 500 million humans,,which means that if we all wore Birkenstocks and cotton,,the world would run out of cork and dry up.,So we need materials in closed cycles,,but we need to analyze them down to the parts per million,for cancer, birth defects, mutagenic effects,,disruption of our immune systems, biodegradation, persistence,,heavy metal content, knowledge of how we're making them,and their production and so on. 
 Our first product was a textile where we analyzed 8,000 chemicals,in the textile industry.,Using those intellectual filters, we eliminated [7,962.],We were left with 38 chemicals.,We have since databased the 4000 most commonly used chemicals,in human manufacturing, and we're releasing this database into the public in six weeks.,So designers all over the world can analyze their products,down to the parts per million for human and ecological health. 
 (Applause) 
 We've developed a protocol so that companies can send,these same messages all the way through their supply chains,,because when we asked most companies we work with -- about a trillion dollars,-- and say, "Where does your stuff come from?" They say, "Suppliers.","And where does it go?","Customers.",So we need some help there. 
 So the biological nutrients, the first fabrics --,the water coming out was clean enough to drink.,Technical nutrients -- this is for Shaw Carpet, infinitely reusable carpet.,Here's nylon going back to caprolactam back to carpet.,Biotechnical nutrients -- the Model U for Ford Motor,,a cradle to cradle car -- concept car.,Shoes for Nike, where the uppers are polyesters, infinitely recyclable,,the bottoms are biodegradable soles.,Wear your old shoes in, your new shoes out.,There is no finish line.,The idea here of the car is that some of the materials,go back to the industry forever, some of the materials go back to soil --,it's all solar-powered. 
 Here's a building at Oberlin College we designed,that makes more energy than it needs to operate and purifies its own water.,Here's a building for The Gap, where the ancient grasses,of San Bruno, California, are on the roof. 
 And this is our project for Ford Motor Company.,It's the revitalization of the River Rouge in Dearborn.,This is obviously a color photograph.,These are our tools. These are how we sold it to Ford.,We saved Ford 35 million dollars doing it this way, day one,,which is the equivalent of the Ford Taurus,at a four percent margin of an order for 900 million dollars worth of cars.,Here it is. It's the world's largest green roof, 10 and a half acres.,This is the roof, saving money,,and this is the first species to arrive here. These are killdeer.,They showed up in five days.,And we now have 350-pound auto workers,learning bird songs on the Internet.,We're developing now protocols for cities --,that's the home of technical nutrients.,The country -- the home of biological. And putting them together. 
 And so I will finish by showing you a new city,we're designing for the Chinese government.,We're doing 12 cities for China right now,,based on cradle to cradle as templates.,Our assignment is to develop protocols for the housing,for 400 million people in 12 years.,We did a mass energy balance -- if they use brick,,they will lose all their soil and burn all their coal.,They'll have cities with no energy and no food.,We signed a Memorandum of Understanding --,here's Madam Deng Nan, Deng Xiaoping's daughter --,for China to adopt cradle to cradle.,Because if they toxify themselves, being the lowest-cost producer,,send it to the lowest-cost distribution -- Wal-Mart --,and then we send them all our money, what we'll discover is that,we have what, effectively, when I was a student,,was called mutually assured destruction. 
 Now we do it by molecule. These are our cities.,We're building a new city next to this city; look at that landscape.,This is the site.,We don't normally do green fields, but this one is about to be built,,so they brought us in to intercede.,This is their plan.,It's a rubber stamp grid that they laid right on that landscape.,And they brought us in and said, "What would you do?",This is what they would end up with, which is another color photograph.,So this is the existing site, so this is what it looks like now,,and here's our proposal. 
 (Applause) 
 So the way we approached this,is we studied the hydrology very carefully.,We studied the biota, the ancient biota,,the current farming and the protocols.,We studied the winds and the sun to make sure everybody in the city,will have fresh air, fresh water and direct sunlight,in every single apartment at some point during the day.,We then take the parks and lay them out as ecological infrastructure.,We lay out the building areas.,We start to integrate commercial and mixed use,so the people all have centers and places to be.,The transportation is all very simple,,everybody's within a five-minute walk of mobility.,We have a 24-hour street, so that there's always a place that's alive.,The waste systems all connect.,If you flush a toilet, your feces will go to the sewage treatment plants,,which are sold as assets, not liabilities.,Because who wants the fertilizer factory that makes natural gas?,The waters are all taken in to construct the wetlands for habitat restorations.,And then it makes natural gas, which then goes back into the city,to power the fuel for the cooking for the city.,So this is -- these are fertilizer gas plants.,And then the compost is all taken back,to the roofs of the city, where we've got farming,,because what we've done is lifted up the city,,the landscape, into the air to -- to restore the native landscape,on the roofs of the buildings.,The solar power of all the factory centers,and all the industrial zones with their light roofs powers the city. 
 And this is the concept for the top of the city.,We've lifted the earth up onto the roofs.,The farmers have little bridges to get from one roof to the next.,We inhabit the city with work/live space on all the ground floors.,And so this is the existing city, and this is the new city. 
 (Applause)Walk around for four months with three wishes,,and all the ideas will start to percolate up.,I think everybody should do it -- think that you've got three wishes.,And what would you do? It's actually a great exercise,to really drill down to the things that you feel are important,,and really reflect on the world around us.,And thinking that, can an individual actually do something,,or come up with something,,that may actually get some traction out there and make a difference?,Inspired by nature -- that's the theme here.,And I think, quite frankly, that's where I started. 
 I became very interested in the landscape as a Canadian.,We have this Great North. And there was a pretty small population,,and my father was an avid outdoorsman.,So I really had a chance to experience that.,And I could never really understand exactly what it was, or how it was informing me.,But what I think it was telling me,is that we are this transient thing that's happening,,and that the nature that you see out there -- the untouched shorelines,,the untouched forest that I was able to see --,really bring in a sense of that geological time,,that this has gone on for a long time,,and we're experiencing it in a different way. 
 And that, to me, was a reference point that I think I needed to have,to be able to make the work that I did.,And I did go out, and I did this picture of grasses coming through in the spring,,along a roadside.,This rebirth of grass. And then I went out for years,trying to photograph the pristine landscape.,But as a fine-art photographer I somehow felt,that it wouldn't catch on out there,,that there would be a problem with trying to make this as a fine-art career.,And I kept being sucked into this genre of the calendar picture,,or something of that nature, and I couldn't get away from it.,So I started to think of, how can I rethink the landscape?,I decided to rethink the landscape,as the landscape that we've transformed. 
 I had a bit of an epiphany being lost in Pennsylvania,,and I took a left turn trying to get back to the highway.,And I ended up in a town called Frackville.,I got out of the car, and I stood up,,and it was a coal-mining town. I did a 360 turnaround,,and that became one of the most surreal landscapes I've ever seen.,Totally transformed by man.,And that got me to go out and look at mines like this,,and go out and look at the largest industrial incursions,in the landscape that I could find.,And that became the baseline of what I was doing.,And it also became the theme that I felt that I could hold onto,,and not have to re-invent myself --,that this theme was large enough to become a life's work,,to become something that I could sink my teeth into,and just research and find out where these industries are. 
 And I think one of the things I also wanted to say in my thanks,,which I kind of missed,,was to thank all the corporations who helped me get in.,Because it took negotiation for almost every one of these photographs --,to get into that place to make those photographs,,and if it wasn't for those people letting me in,at the heads of those corporations,,I would have never made this body of work.,So in that respect, to me, I'm not against the corporation.,I own a corporation. I work with them,,and I feel that we all need them and they're important.,But I am also for sustainability. 
 So there's this thing that is pulling me in both directions.,And I'm not making an indictment towards what's happening here,,but it is a slow progression.,So I started thinking, well, we live in all these ages of man:,the Stone Age, and the Iron Age, and the Copper Age.,And these ages of man are still at work today.,But we've become totally disconnected from them.,There's something that we're not seeing there.,And it's a scary thing as well. Because when we start looking,at the collective appetite for our lifestyles,,and what we're doing to that landscape --,that, to me, is something that is a very sobering moment for me to contemplate. 
 And through my photographs,,I'm hoping to be able to engage the audiences of my work,,and to come up to it and not immediately be rejected by the image.,Not to say, "Oh my God, what is it?" but to be challenged by it --,to say, "Wow, this is beautiful," on one level,,but on the other level, "This is scary. I shouldn't be enjoying it.",Like a forbidden pleasure. And it's that forbidden pleasure,that I think is what resonates out there,,and it gets people to look at these things,,and it gets people to enter it. And it also, in a way, defines kind of what I feel, too --,that I'm drawn to have a good life.,I want a house, and I want a car.,But there's this consequence out there.,And how do I begin to have that attraction, repulsion?,It's even in my own conscience I'm having it,,and here in my work, I'm trying to build that same toggle. 
 These things that I photographed -- this tire pile here,had 45 million tires in it. It was the largest one.,It was only about an hour-and-a-half away from me, and it caught fire,about four years ago. It's around Westley, California, around Modesto.,And I decided to start looking at something that, to me, had --,if the earlier work of looking at the landscape,had a sense of lament to what we were doing to nature,,in the recycling work that you're seeing here,was starting to point to a direction. To me, it was our redemption.,That in the recycling work that I was doing,,I'm looking for a practice, a human activity that is sustainable.,That if we keep putting things, through industrial and urban existence,,back into the system --,if we keep doing that -- we can continue on.,Of course, listening at the conference,,there's many, many things that are coming. Bio-mimicry,,and there's many other things that are coming on stream --,nanotechnology that may also prevent us from having,to go into that landscape and tear it apart.,And we all look forward to those things. 
 But in the meantime, these things are scaling up.,These things are continuing to happen.,What you're looking at here -- I went to Bangladesh,,so I started to move away from North America;,I started to look at our world globally.,These images of Bangladesh,came out of a radio program I was listening to.,They were talking about Exxon Valdez,,and that there was going to be a glut of oil tankers,because of the insurance industries.,And that those oil tankers needed to be decommissioned,,and 2004 was going to be the pinnacle.,And I thought, "My God, wouldn't that be something?",To see the largest vessels of man being deconstructed by hand,,literally, in third-world countries.,So originally I was going to go to India.,And I was shut out of India because of a Greenpeace situation there,,and then I was able to get into Bangladesh,,and saw for the first time a third world, a view of it,,that I had never actually thought was possible.,130 million people living in an area the size of Wisconsin --,people everywhere -- the pollution was intense,,and the working conditions were horrible. 
 Here you're looking at some oil fields in California,,some of the biggest oil fields. And again, I started to think that --,there was another epiphany --,that the whole world I was living in was,a result of having plentiful oil.,And that, to me, was again something that I started building on,,and I continued to build on.,So this is a series I'm hoping to have ready,in about two or three years,,under the heading of "The Oil Party.",Because I think everything that we're involved in --,our clothing, our cars, our roads, and everything -- are directly a result.,I'm going to move to some pictures of China.,And for me China -- I started photographing it four years ago,,and China truly is a question of sustainability in my mind, 
 not to mention that China, as well,,has a great effect on the industries that I grew up around.,I came out of a blue-collar town,,a GM town, and my father worked at GM,,so I was very familiar with that kind of industry,and that also informed my work. But you know,,to see China and the scale at which it's evolving, is quite something.,So what you see here is the Three Gorges Dam,,and this is the largest dam by 50 percent ever attempted by man.,Most of the engineers around the world left the project,because they said, "It's just too big.",In fact, when it did actually fill with water a year and a half ago,,they were able to measure a wobble within the earth as it was spinning.,It took fifteen days to fill it.,So this created a reservoir 600 kilometers long,,one of the largest reservoirs ever created.,And what was also one of the bigger projects around that,was moving 13 full-size cities up out of the reservoir,,and flattening all the buildings so they could make way for the ships. 
 This is a "before and after." So that was before.,And this is like 10 weeks later, demolished by hand.,I think 11 of the buildings they used dynamite,,everything else was by hand. That was 10 weeks later.,And this gives you an idea.,And it was all the people who lived in those homes,,were the ones that were actually taking it apart,and working, and getting paid per brick to take their cities apart.,And these are some of the images from that.,So I spent about three trips to the Three Gorges Dam,,looking at that massive transformation of a landscape.,And it looks like a bombed-out landscape, but it isn't.,What it is, it's a landscape that is an intentional one.,This is a need for power, and they're willing to go through this,massive transformation, on this scale, to get that power. 
 And again, it's actually a relief for what's going on in China,because I think on the table right now,,there's 27 nuclear power stations to be built.,There hasn't been one built in North America for 20 years,because of the "NIMBY" problem -- "Not In My BackYard.",But in China they're saying, "No, we're putting in 27 in the next 10 years.",And coal-burning furnaces are going in there,for hydroelectric power literally weekly.,So coal itself is probably one of the largest problems.,And one of the other things that happened in the Three Gorges --,a lot of the agricultural land that you see there on the left was also lost;,some of the most fertile agricultural land was lost in that.,And 1.2 to 2 million people were relocated,,depending on whose statistics you're looking at.,And this is what they were building. 
 This is Wushan, one of the largest cities that was relocated.,This is the town hall for the city.,And again, the rebuilding of the city -- to me, it was sad to see,that they didn't really grab a lot of, I guess,,what we know here, in terms of urban planning.,There were no parks; there were no green spaces.,Very high-density living on the side of a hill.,And here they had a chance to rebuild cities from the bottom up,,but somehow were not connecting with them. 
 Here is a sign that, translated, says, "Obey the birth control law.,Build our science, civilized and advanced idea of marriage and giving birth.",So here, if you look at this poster,,it has all the trappings of Western culture.,You're seeing the tuxedos, the bouquets.,But what's really, to me, frightening about the picture,and about this billboard is the refinery in the background.,So it's like marrying up all the things that we have,and it's an adaptation of our way of life, full stop.,And again, when you start seeing that kind of embrace,,and you start looking at them leading their rural lifestyle,with a very, very small footprint and moving into an urban lifestyle,with a much higher footprint, it starts to become very sobering. 
 This is a shot in one of the biggest squares in Guangdong --,and this is where a lot of migrant workers are coming in from the country.,And there's about 130 million people in migration,trying to get into urban centers at all times,,and in the next 10 to 15 years, are expecting,another 400 to 500 million people to migrate,into the urban centers like Shanghai and the manufacturing centers.,The manufacturers are --,the domestics are usually -- you can tell a domestic factory by the fact,that they all use the same color uniforms.,So this is a pink uniform at this factory. It's a shoe factory.,And they have dorms for the workers.,So they bring them in from the country and put them up in the dorms. 
 This is one of the biggest shoe factories, the Yuyuan shoe factory,near Shenzhen. It has 90,000 employees making shoes.,This is a shift change, one of three.,There's two factories of this scale in the same town.,This is one with 45,000, so every lunch,,there's about 12,000 coming through for lunch.,They sit down; they have about 20 minutes.,The next round comes in. It's an incredible workforce,that's building there. Shanghai --,I'm looking at the urban renewal in Shanghai,,and this is a whole area that will be flattened,and turned into skyscrapers in the next five years. 
 What's also happening in Shanghai is --,China is changing because this wouldn't have happened,five years ago, for instance. This is a holdout.,They're called dengzahoos -- they're like pin tacks to the ground.,They won't move. They're not negotiating.,They're not getting enough, so they're not going to move.,And so they're holding off until they get a deal with them.,And they've been actually quite successful in getting better deals,because most of them are getting a raw deal.,They're being put out about two hours --,the communities that have been around for literally hundreds of years,,or maybe even thousands of years,,are being broken up and spread across in the suburban areas,outside of Shanghai. But these are a whole series of guys,holding out in this reconstruction of Shanghai.,Probably the largest urban-renewal project, I think,,ever attempted on the planet. 
 And then the embrace of the things that they're replacing it with --,again, one of my wishes, and I never ended up going there,,was to somehow tell them that there were better ways to build a house.,The kinds of collisions of styles and things were quite something,,and these are called the villas.,And also, like right now, they're just moving.,The scaffolding is still on, and this is an e-waste area,,and if you looked in the foreground on the big print,,you'd see that the industry -- their industry -- they're all recycling.,So the industry's already growing,around these new developments. 
 This is a five-level bridge in Shanghai.,Shanghai was a very intriguing city -- it's exploding on a level,that I don't think any city has experienced.,In fact, even Shenzhen, the economic zone --,one of the first ones -- 15 years ago was about 100,000 people,,and today it boasts about 10 to 11 million.,So that gives you an idea of the kinds of migrations and the speed with which --,this is just the taxis being built by Volkswagen.,There's 9,000 of them here,,and they're being built for most of the big cities,,Beijing and Shanghai, Shenzhen.,And this isn't even the domestic car market; this is the taxi market.,And what we would see here as a suburban development --,a similar thing, but they're all high-rises.,So they'll put 20 or 40 up at a time,,and they just go up in the same way,as a single-family dwelling would go up here in an area. 
 And the density is quite incredible.,And one of the things in this picture that I wanted to point out,is that when I saw these kinds of buildings,,I was shocked to see,that they're not using a central air-conditioning system;,every window has an air conditioner in it.,And I'm sure there are people here who probably,know better than I do about efficiencies,,but I can't imagine that every apartment having its own air conditioner,is a very efficient way to cool a building on this scale.,And when you start looking at that,,and then you start factoring up into a city the size of Shanghai,,it's literally a forest of skyscrapers.,It's breathtaking, in terms of the speed at which this city is transforming.,And you can see in the foreground of this picture,,it's still one of the last areas that was being held up.,Right now that's all cleared out -- this was done about eight months ago --,and high-rises are now going up into that central spot.,So a skyscraper is built, literally, overnight in Shanghai. 
 Most recently I went in, and I started looking,at some of the biggest industries in China.,And this is Baosteel, right outside of Shanghai.,This is the coal supply for the steel factory -- 18 square kilometers.,It's an incredibly massive operation, I think 15,000 workers,,five cupolas, and the sixth one's coming in here.,So they're building very large blast furnaces,to try to deal with the demand for steel in China.,So this is three of the visible blast furnaces within that shot.,And again, looking at these images, there's this constant, like, haze that you're seeing.,This is going to show you, real time, an assembler. It's a circuit breaker.,10 hours a day at this speed.,I think one of the issues,that we here are facing with China,,is that they're using a lot of the latest production technology. 
 In that one, there were 400 people that worked on the floor.,And I asked the manager to point out five of your fastest producers,,and then I went and looked at each one of them for about 15 or 20 minutes,,and picked this one woman.,And it was just lightning fast;,the way she was working was almost unbelievable.,But that is the trick that they've got right now,,that they're winning with, is that they're using,all the latest technologies and extrusion machines,,and bringing all the components into play,,but the assembly is where they're actually bringing in --,the country workers are very willing to work. They want to work.,There's a massive backlog of people wanting their jobs.,That condition's going to be there for the next 10 to 15 years,if they realize what they want, which is, you know,,400 to 500 million more people coming into the cities. 
 In this particular case -- this is the assembly line that you saw;,this is a shot of it.,I had to use a very small aperture to get the depth of field.,I had to have them freeze for 10 seconds to get this shot.,It took me five fake tries,because they were just going. To slow them down was literally impossible.,They were just wound up doing these things all day long,,until the manager had to, with a stern voice, say,,"Okay, everybody freeze.",It wasn't too bad,,but they're driven to produce these things at an incredible rate. 
 This is a textile mill doing synthetic silk, an oil byproduct.,And what you're seeing here is,,again, one of the most state-of-the-art textile mills.,There are 500 of these machines; they're worth about 200,000 dollars each.,So you have about 12 people running this,,and they're just inspecting it -- and they're just walking the lines.,The machines are all running,,absolutely incredible to see what the scale of industries are.,And I started getting in further and further into the factories.,And that's a diptych. I do a lot of pairings,to try and get the sense of scale in these places.,This is a line where they get the threads,and they wind the threads together,,pre-going into the textile mills. 
 Here's something that's far more labor-intensive,,which is the making of shoes.,This floor has about 1,500 workers on this floor.,The company itself had about 10,000 employees,,and they're doing domestic shoes.,It was very hard to get into the international companies,because I had to get permission from companies like Nike and Adidas,,and that's very hard to get.,And they don't want to let me in.,But the domestic was much easier to do.,It just gives you a sense of, again -- and that's where,,really, the whole migration of jobs started going over to China,and making the shoes. Nike was one of the early ones.,It was such a high labor component to it,that it made a lot of sense to go after that labor market. 
 This is a high-tech mobile phone: Bird mobile phone,,one of the largest mobile makers in China.,I think mobile phone companies,are popping up, literally, on a weekly basis,,and they have an explosive growth in mobile phones.,This is a textile where they're doing shirts --,Youngor, the biggest shirt factory and clothing factory in China.,And this next shot here is one of the lunchrooms.,Everything is very efficient.,While setting up this shot,,people on average would spend eight to 10 minutes having a lunch.,This was one of the biggest factories I've ever seen.,They make coffeemakers here, the biggest coffeemaker,and the biggest iron makers --,they make 20 million of them in the world.,There's 21,000 employees. This one factory -- and they had several of them --,is half a kilometer long.,These are just recently shot -- I just came back about a month ago,,so you're the first ones to be seeing these,,these new factory pictures I've taken. 
 So it's taken me almost a year to gain access into these places.,The other aspect of what's happening in China,is that there's a real need for materials there.,So a lot of the recycled materials that are collected here,are being recycled and taken to China by ships.,That's cubed metal. This is armatures, electrical armatures,,where they're getting the copper and the high-end steel,from electrical motors out, and recycling them.,This is certainly connected to California and Silicon Valley.,But this is what happens to most of the computers.,Fifty percent of the world's computers end up in China to be recycled. 
 It's referred to as "e-waste" there.,And it is a bit of a problem. The way they recycle the boards,is that they actually use the coal briquettes,,which are used all through China, but they heat up the boards,,and with pairs of pliers they pull off all the components.,They're trying to get all the valued metals out of those components.,But the toxic smells -- when you come into a town,that's actually doing this kind of burning of the boards,,you can smell it a good five or 10 kilometers before you get there.,Here's another operation. It's all cottage industries,,so it's not big places -- it's all in people's front porches,,in their backyards, even in their homes they're burning boards, 
 if there's a concern for somebody coming by --,because it is considered in China to be illegal, doing it,,but they can't stop the product from coming in.,This portrait -- I'm not usually known for portraits,,but I couldn't resist this one, where she's been through Mao,,and she's been through the Great Leap Forward,,and the Cultural Revolution, and now she's sitting on her porch,with this e-waste beside her. It's quite something.,This is a road where it's been shored up by computer boards,in one of the biggest towns where they're recycling.,So that's the photographs that I wanted to show you. 
 (Applause) 
 I want to dedicate my wishes to my two girls.,They've been sitting on my shoulder the whole time while I've been thinking.,One's Megan, the one of the right, and Katja there.,And to me the whole notion --,the things I'm photographing are out of a great concern,about the scale of our progress and what we call progress.,And as much as there are great things around the corner --,and it's palpable in this room --,of all of the things that are just about to break,that can solve so many problems,,I'm really hoping that those things will spread around the world,and will start to have a positive effect.,And it isn't something that isn't just affecting our world,,but it starts to go up -- because I think we can start correcting,our footprint and bring it down -- but there's a growing footprint,that's happening in Asia, and is growing at a rapid, rapid rate,,and so I don't think we can equalize it. So ultimately the strategy,,I think, here is that we have to be very concerned about their evolution,,because it is going to be connected to our evolution as well. 
 So part of my thinking, and part of my wishes,,is sitting with these thoughts in mind,,and thinking about,,"How is their life going to be when they want to have children,,or when they're ready to get married 20 years from now -- or whatever,,15 years from now?",And to me that has been the core behind most of my thinking --,in my work, and also for this incredible chance to have some wishes.,Wish one: world-changing. I want to use my images,to persuade millions of people to join in the global conversation on sustainability.,And it is through communications today,that I believe that that is not an unreal idea.,Oh, and I went in search -- I wanted to put what I had in mind,,hitch it onto something. I didn't want a wish just to start from nowhere. 
 One of them I'm starting from almost nothing, but the other one,,I wanted to find out what's going on that's working right now.,And Worldchanging.com is a fantastic blog, and that blog,is now being visited by close to half-a-million people a month.,And it just started about 14 months ago.,And the beauty of what's going on there,is that the tone of the conversation is the tone that I like.,What they're doing there is that they're not --,I think the environmental movement has failed,in that it's used the stick too much;,it's used the apocalyptic tone too much;,it hasn't sold the positive aspects of,being environmentally concerned and trying to pull us out.,Whereas this conversation that is going on in this blog,is about positive movements,,about how to change our world in a better way, quickly.,And it's looking at technology, and it's looking at new energy-saving devices,,and it's looking at how to rethink and how to re-strategize,the movement towards sustainability. 
 And so for me, one of the things that I thought,would be to put some of my work in the service of promoting,the Worldchanging.com website.,Some of you might know, he's a TEDster -- Stephen Sagmeister and I,are working on some layouts. And this is still in preliminary stages;,these aren't the finals. But these images, with Worldchanging.com,,can be placed into any kind of media.,They could be posted through the Web;,they could be used as a billboard or a bus shelter, or anything of that nature.,So we're looking at this as trying to build out.,And what we ended up discussing,was that in most media you get mostly an image with a lot of text,,and the text is blasted all over. 
 What was unusual, according to Stephen,,is less than five percent of ads are actually leading with image.,And so in this case,,because it's about a lot of these images and what they represent,,and the kinds of questions they bring up,,that we thought letting the images play out and bring someone to say,,"Well, what's Worldchanging.com, with these images, have to do?",And hopefully inspire people to go to that website.,So Worldchanging.com, and building that blog, and it is a blog,,and I'm hoping that it isn't -- I don't see it as the kind of blog,where we're all going to follow each other to death.,This one is one that will spoke out, and will go out,,and to start reaching. Because right now there's conversations,in India, in China, in South America --,there's entries coming from all around the world.,I think there's a chance to have a dialogue, a conversation,about sustainability at Worldchanging.com.,And anything that you can do to promote that would be fantastic. 
 Wish two is more of the bottom-up, ground-up one that I'm trying to work with.,And this one is: I wish to launch a groundbreaking competition,that motivates kids to invest ideas on, and invent ideas on, sustainability.,And one of the things that came out --,Allison, who actually nominated me, said something earlier on,in a brainstorming. She said that recycling in Canada,had a fantastic entry into our psyche through kids between grade four and six.,And you think about it, you know,,grade four -- my wife and I, we say age seven is the age of reason,,so they're into the age of reason. And they're pre-puberty.,So it's this great window where they actually are --,you can influence them. You know what happens at puberty?,You know, we know that from earlier presentations. 
 So my thinking here is that we try to motivate those kids,to start driving home ideas. Let them understand what sustainability is,,and that they have a vested interest in it to happen.,And one of the ways I thought of doing it is to use my prize,,so I would take 30,000 or 40,000 dollars of the winnings,,and the rest is going to be to manage this project,,but to use that as prizes for kids to get into their hands.,But the other thing that I thought would be fantastic,was to create these -- call them "prize targets.",And so one could be for the best sustainable idea,for an in-school project, the best one for a household project,,or it could be the best community project for sustainability. 
 And I also thought there should be a nice prize,for the best artwork for "In My World." And what would happen --,it's a scalable thing. And if we can get people to put in things --,whether it's equipment, like a media lab,,or money to make the prize significant enough --,and to open it up to all the schools that are public schools,,or schools that are with kids that age,,and make it a wide-open competition for them,to go after those prizes and to submit them.,And the prize has to be a verifiable thing, so it's not about just ideas.,The art pieces are about the ideas and how they present them,and do them, but the actual things have to be verifiable.,In that way, what's happening is that,we're motivating a certain age group to start thinking.,And they're going to push that up, from the bottom -- up into,,I believe, into the households. And parents will be reacting to it,,and trying to help them with the projects. 
 And I think it starts to motivate the whole idea towards sustainability,in a very positive way,,and starts to teach them. They know about recycling now,,but they don't really, I think, get sustainability in all the things,,and the energy footprint, and how that matters.,And to teach them, to me, would be a fantastic wish,,and it would be something that I would certainly put my shoulder into.,And again, in "In My World," the competition --,we would use the artwork that comes in from that competition to promote it.,And I like the words, "in my world,",because it gives possession of the world to the person who's doing it.,It is my world; it's not someone else's. I want to help it;,I want to do something with it. So I think it has a great opportunity,to engage the imaginations -- and great ideas, I think, come from kids --,and engage their imagination into a project,,and do something for schools.,I think all schools could use extra equipment, extra cash --,it's going to be an incentive for them to do that.,And these are some of the ideas in terms of where,we could possibly put in some promotion for "In My World." 
 And wish three is: Imax film. So I was told I should do one for myself,,and I've always wanted to actually get involved with doing something.,And the scale of my work, and the kinds of ideas I'm playing with --,when I first saw an Imax film, I almost immediately thought,,"There's a real resonance between what I'm trying to do,and the scale of what I try to do as a photographer.",And I think there's a real possibility,to reach new audiences if I had a chance.,So I'm looking, really, for a mentor, because I just had my birthday.,I'm 50, and I don't have time to go back to school right now --,I'm too busy. So I need somebody,who can put me on a quick catch-up course on how to do something like that,,and lead me through the maze of how one does something like this.,That would be fantastic. So those are my three wishes. 
 (Applause)This is really a two-hour presentationnI give to high school students,,cut down to three minutes.,And it all started one daynon a plane, on my way to TED,,seven years ago.,And in the seat next to menwas a high school student, a teenager,,and she came from a really poor family.,And she wanted to makensomething of her life,,and she asked me a simple little question.,She said, "What leads to success?",And I felt really badly,,because I couldn't give her a good answer. 
 So I get off the plane, and I come to TED.,And I think, jeez, I'm in the middlenof a room of successful people!,So why don't I ask themnwhat helped them succeed,,and pass it on to kids?,So here we are, seven years,n500 interviews later,,and I'm going to tell younwhat really leads to success,and makes TEDsters tick. 
 And the first thing is passion.,Freeman Thomas says,n"I'm driven by my passion.",TEDsters do it for love;nthey don't do it for money. 
 Carol Coletta says, "I would paynsomeone to do what I do.",And the interesting thing is:,if you do it for love,nthe money comes anyway. 
 Work! Rupert Murdoch saidnto me, "It's all hard work.,Nothing comes easily.nBut I have a lot of fun.",Did he say fun? Rupert? Yes! 
 (Laughter) 
 TEDsters do have fun working.nAnd they work hard.,I figured, they're not workaholics.nThey're workafrolics. 
 (Laughter) 
 Good! 
 (Applause) 
 Alex Garden says, "To be successful,nput your nose down in something,and get damn good at it.",There's no magic;nit's practice, practice, practice. 
 And it's focus.,Norman Jewison said to me,,"I think it all has to donwith focusing yourself on one thing." 
 And push!,David Gallo says, "Push yourself.,Physically, mentally,nyou've got to push, push, push.",You've got to push through shynessnand self-doubt. 
 Goldie Hawn says,n"I always had self-doubts.,I wasn't good enough;nI wasn't smart enough.,I didn't think I'd make it." 
 Now it's not always easy to push yourself,,and that's why they invented mothers. 
 (Laughter) 
 (Applause),Frank Gehry said to me,,"My mother pushed me." 
 (Laughter) 
 Serve!,Sherwin Nuland says,n"It was a privilege to serve as a doctor." 
 A lot of kids want to be millionaires.,The first thing I say is:,"OK, well you can't serve yourself;,you've got to serve othersnsomething of value.,Because that's the waynpeople really get rich." 
 Ideas!,TEDster Bill Gates says, "I had an idea:,founding the first micro-computernsoftware company.",I'd say it was a pretty good idea.,And there's no magic to creativitynin coming up with ideas --,it's just doing some very simple things.,And I give lots of evidence. 
 Persist!,Joe Kraus says,,"Persistence is the numbernone reason for our success.",You've got to persist through failure.nYou've got to persist through crap!,Which of course means "Criticism,nRejection, Assholes and Pressure." 
 (Laughter) 
 So, the answer to this question is simple:,Pay 4,000 bucks and come to TED. 
 (Laughter) 
 Or failing that, donthe eight things -- and trust me,,these are the big eight thingsnthat lead to success. 
 Thank you TEDstersnfor all your interviews! 
 (Applause)This is me. My name is Ben Saunders.,I specialize in dragging heavy things,around cold places. 
 On May 11th last year,,I stood alone at the North geographic Pole.,I was the only human being in an area,one-and-a-half times the size of America,,five-and-a-half thousand square miles.,More than 2,000 people have climbed Everest.,12 people have stood on the moon.,Including me, only four people,have skied solo to the North Pole.,And I think the reason for that --,(Applause),-- thank you -- I think the reason for that is that it's -- it's --,well, it's as Chris said, bonkers.,It's a journey that is right at the limit,of human capability.,I skied the equivalent of 31 marathons,back to back. 800 miles in 10 weeks.,And I was dragging all the food I needed,,the supplies, the equipment, sleeping bag,,one change of underwear -- everything I needed for nearly three months.,(Laughter),What we're going to try and do today, in the 16 and a bit minutes I've got left,,is to try and answer three questions. The first one is, why?,The second one is,,how do you go to the loo at minus 40?,"Ben, I've read somewhere that at minus 40,,exposed skin becomes frostbitten in less than a minute, so how do you answer the call of nature?",I don't want to answer these now. I'll come on to them at the end.,Third one: how do you top that? What's next? 
 It all started back in 2001.,My first expedition was with a guy called Pen Hadow -- enormously experienced chap.,This was like my polar apprenticeship.,We were trying to ski from this group of islands up here,,Severnaya Zemlya, to the North Pole.,And the thing that fascinates me about the North Pole,,geographic North Pole, is that it's slap bang in the middle of the sea.,This is about as good as maps get,,and to reach it you've got to ski literally,over the frozen crust,,the floating skin of ice on the Artic Ocean.,I'd spoken to all the experts.,I'd read lots of books. I studied maps and charts.,But I realized on the morning of day one,that I had no idea exactly,what I'd let myself in for. 
 I was 23 years old. No one my age,had attempted anything like this,,and pretty quickly, almost everything,that could have gone wrong did go wrong.,We were attacked by a polar bear on day two.,I had frostbite in my left big toe.,We started running very low on food. We were both pretty hungry, losing lots of weight.,Some very unusual weather conditions, very difficult ice conditions.,We had,decidedly low-tech communications.,We couldn't afford a satellite phone, so we had HF radio.,You can see two ski poles sticking out of the roof of the tent.,There's a wire dangling down either side.,That was our HF radio antenna.,We had less than two hours,two-way communication with the outside world in two months.,Ultimately, we ran out of time.,We'd skied 400 miles. We were just over 200 miles left,to go to the Pole, and we'd run out of time.,We were too late into the summer; the ice was starting to melt;,we spoke to the Russian helicopter pilots on the radio,,and they said, "Look boys, you've run out of time.,We've got to pick you up.",And I felt that I had failed, wholeheartedly.,I was a failure. 
 The one goal, the one dream I'd had,for as long as I could remember -- I hadn't even come close.,And skiing along that first trip, I had two,imaginary video clips that I'd replay over and over again in my mind,when the going got tough, just to keep my motivation going.,The first one was reaching the Pole itself.,I could see vividly, I suppose,,being filmed out of the door of a helicopter, there was, kind of, rock music playing in the background,,and I had a ski pole with a Union Jack, you know, flying in the wind.,I could see myself sticking the flag in a pole, you know --,ah, glorious moment -- the music kind of reaching a crescendo.,The second video clip,that I imagined was getting back to Heathrow airport,,and I could see again, vividly,,the camera flashbulbs going off,,the paparazzi, the autograph hunters,,the book agents coming to sign me up for a deal.,And of course, neither of these things happened.,We didn't get to the Pole, and we didn't have any money,to pay anyone to do the PR, so no one had heard,of this expedition. 
 And I got back to Heathrow. My mum was there; my brother was there;,my granddad was there -- had a little Union Jack --,(Laughter),-- and that was about it. I went back to live with my mum.,I was physically exhausted,,mentally an absolute wreck, considered myself a failure.,In a huge amount of debt personally to this expedition,,and lying on my mum's sofa,,day in day out, watching daytime TV.,My brother sent me a text message, an SMS --,it was a quote from the "Simpsons." It said,,"You tried your hardest and failed miserably.,The lesson is: don't even try.",(Laughter) 
 Fast forward three years. I did eventually get off the sofa,,and start planning another expedition. This time,,I wanted to go right across, on my own this time,,from Russia, at the top of the map,,to the North Pole, where the sort of kink in the middle is,,and then on to Canada.,No one has made a complete crossing of the Arctic Ocean on their own.,Two Norwegians did it as a team in 2000. No one's done it solo.,Very famous, very accomplished Italian mountaineer,,Reinhold Messner, tried it in 1995,,and he was rescued after a week.,He described this expedition as 10 times,as dangerous as Everest.,So for some reason, this was what I wanted to have a crack at,,but I knew that even to stand a chance of getting home in one piece,,let alone make it across to Canada,,I had to take a radical approach.,This meant everything from perfecting the,sawn-off, sub-two-gram toothbrush,,to working with one of the world's leading nutritionists,in developing a completely new,,revolutionary nutritional strategy from scratch:,6,000 calories a day. 
 And the expedition started in February last year.,Big support team. We had a film crew,,a couple of logistics people with us,,my girlfriend, a photographer.,At first it was pretty sensible. We flew British Airways to Moscow.,The next bit in Siberia to Krasnoyarsk,,on a Russian internal airline called KrasAir,,spelled K-R-A-S.,The next bit, we'd chartered a pretty elderly Russian plane,to fly us up to a town called Khatanga,,which was the sort of last bit of civilization.,Our cameraman, who it turned out was a pretty nervous flier at the best of times,,actually asked the pilot, before we got on the plane, how long this flight would take,,and the pilot -- Russian pilot -- completely deadpan, replied,,"Six hours -- if we live.",(Laughter),We got to Khatanga.,I think the joke is that Khatanga isn't the end of the world,,but you can see it from there.,(Laughter),It was supposed to be an overnight stay. We were stuck there for 10 days.,There was a kind of vodka-fueled pay dispute between,the helicopter pilots and the people that owned the helicopter,,so we were stuck. We couldn't move.,Finally, morning of day 11, we got the all-clear,,loaded up the helicopters -- two helicopters flying in tandem --,dropped me off at the edge of the pack ice.,We had a frantic sort of 45 minutes of filming,,photography; while the helicopter was still there,,I did an interview on the satellite phone;,and then everyone else climbed back into the helicopter,,wham, the door closed, and I was alone. 
 And I don't know if words will ever quite do that moment justice.,All I could think about was running back up to the door,,banging on the door, and saying, "Look guys,,I haven't quite thought this through.",(Laughter),To make things worse, you can just see the white dot,up at the top right hand side of the screen; that's a full moon. 
 Because we'd been held up in Russia, of course,,the full moon brings the highest and lowest tides;,when you're standing on the frozen surface of the sea,,high and low tides generally mean,that interesting things are going to happen -- the ice is going to start moving around a bit.,I was, you can see there, pulling two sledges.,Grand total in all, 95 days of food and fuel,,180 kilos -- that's almost exactly 400 pounds.,When the ice was flat or flattish,,I could just about pull both.,When the ice wasn't flat, I didn't have a hope in hell.,I had to pull one, leave it, and go back and get the other one.,Literally scrambling through what's called pressure ice --,the ice had been smashed up under the pressure of the currents of the ocean,,the wind and the tides.,NASA described the ice conditions last year as the worst since records began.,And it's always drifting. The pack ice is always drifting.,I was skiing into headwinds for nine,out of the 10 weeks I was alone last year,,and I was drifting backwards most of the time.,My record was minus 2.5 miles.,I got up in the morning, took the tent down, skied north for seven-and-a-half hours,,put the tent up, and I was two and a half miles further back,than when I'd started.,I literally couldn't keep up with the drift of the ice. 
 (Video): So it's day 22.,I'm lying in the tent, getting ready to go.,The weather is just appalling --,oh, drifted back about five miles,in the last -- last night.,Later in the expedition, the problem was no longer the ice.,It was a lack of ice -- open water.,I knew this was happening. I knew the Artic was warming.,I knew there was more open water. And I had a secret weapon up my sleeve.,This was my little bit of bio-mimicry.,Polar bears on the Artic Ocean move in dead straight lines.,If they come to water, they'll climb in, swim across it.,So we had a dry suit developed -- I worked with a team in Norway --,based on a sort of survival suit --,I suppose, that helicopter pilots would wear --,that I could climb into. It would go on over my boots, over my mittens,,it would pull up around my face, nand seal pretty tightly around my face.,And this meant I could ski,over very thin ice,,and if I fell through, it wasn't the end of the world.,It also meant, if the worst came to the worst,,I could actually jump in and swim across,and drag the sledge over after me.,Some pretty radical technology,,a radical approach --but it worked perfectly. 
 Another exciting thing we did last year,was with communications technology.,In 1912, Shackleton's Endurance expedition --,there was -- one of his crew, a guy called Thomas Orde-Lees.,He said, "The explorers of 2012,,if there is anything left to explore,,will no doubt carry pocket wireless telephones,fitted with wireless telescopes.",Well, Orde-Lees guessed wrong by about eight years. This is my pocket wireless telephone,,Iridium satellite phone.,The wireless telescope was a digital camera I had tucked in my pocket.,And every single day of the 72 days I was alone on the ice,,I was blogging live from my tent,,sending back a little diary piece,,sending back information on the distance I'd covered --,the ice conditions, the temperature --,and a daily photo.,Remember, 2001,,we had less than two hours radio contact with the outside world.,Last year, blogging live from an expedition,that's been described as 10 times as dangerous as Everest.,It wasn't all high-tech. This is navigating,in what's called a whiteout.,When you get lots of mist, low cloud, the wind starts blowing the snow up.,You can't see an awful lot. You can just see, there's a yellow,ribbon tied to one of my ski poles.,I'd navigate using the direction of the wind.,So, kind of a weird combination of high-tech and low-tech. 
 I got to the Pole on the 11th of May.,It took me 68 days to get there from Russia,,and there is nothing there.,(Laughter).,There isn't even a pole at the Pole. There's nothing there,,purely because it's sea ice. It's drifting.,Stick a flag there, leave it there, pretty soon it will drift off, usually towards Canada or Greenland.,I knew this, but I was expecting something.,Strange mixture of feelings: it was extremely warm by this stage,,a lot of open water around, and,of course, elated that I'd got there under my own steam,,but starting to really realize,that my chances of making it all the way across to Canada,,which was still 400 miles away,,were slim at best.,The only proof I've got that I was there,is a blurry photo of my GPS, the little satellite navigation gadget.,You can just see --,there's a nine and a string of zeros here.,Ninety degrees north -- that is slap bang in the North Pole.,I took a photo of that. Sat down on my sledge. Did a sort of video diary piece.,Took a few photos. I got my satellite phone out.,I warmed the battery up in my armpit.,I dialed three numbers. I dialed my mum.,I dialed my girlfriend. I dialed the CEO of my sponsor.,And I got three voicemails.,(Laughter),(Video): Ninety.,It's a special feeling.,The entire planet,is rotating,beneath my feet.,The -- the whole world underneath me.,I finally got through to my mum. She was at the queue of the supermarket.,She started crying. She asked me to call her back.,(Laughter) 
 I skied on for a week past the Pole.,I wanted to get as close to Canada as I could,before conditions just got too dangerous to continue.,This was the last day I had on the ice.,When I spoke to the -- my project management team,,they said, "Look, Ben, conditions are getting too dangerous.,There are huge areas of open water just south of your position.,We'd like to pick you up.,Ben, could you please look for an airstrip?",This was the view outside my tent,when I had this fateful phone call.,I'd never tried to build an airstrip before. Tony, the expedition manager, he said,,"Look Ben, you've got to find 500 meters of,flat, thick safe ice.",The only bit of ice I could find --,it took me 36 hours of skiing around trying to find an airstrip --,was exactly 473 meters. I could measure it with my skis.,I didn't tell Tony that. I didn't tell the pilots that.,I thought, it'll have to do.,(Video): Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh. 
 It just about worked. A pretty dramatic landing --,the plane actually passed over four times,,and I was a bit worried it wasn't going to land at all.,The pilot, I knew, was called Troy. I was expecting someone called Troy,that did this for a living to be a pretty tough kind of guy.,I was bawling my eyes out by the time the plane landed -- a pretty emotional moment.,So I thought, I've got to compose myself for Troy.,I'm supposed to be the roughty toughty explorer type.,The plane taxied up to where I was standing.,The door opened. This guy jumped out. He's about that tall. He said, "Hi, my name is Troy.",(Laughter).,The co-pilot was a lady called Monica.,She sat there in a sort of hand-knitted jumper.,They were the least macho people I've ever met, but they made my day.,Troy was smoking a cigarette on the ice;,we took a few photos. He,climbed up the ladder. He said, "Just -- just get in the back.",He threw his cigarette out as he got on the front,,and I climbed in the back.,(Laughter),Taxied up and down the runway a few times,,just to flatten it out a bit, and he said, "Right, I'm going to --,I'm going to give it a go." And he --,I've now learned that this is standard practice, but it had me worried at the time.,He put his hand on the throttle.,You can see the control for the engines is actually on the roof of the cockpit.,It's that little bar there. He put his hand on the throttle.,Monica very gently put her hand sort of on top of his.,I thought, "God, here we go. We're, we're -- this is all or nothing.",Rammed it forwards. Bounced down the runway. Just took off.,One of the skis just clipped a pressure ridge at the end of the runway,,banking. I could see into the cockpit, Troy battling the controls,,and he just took one hand off, reached back,,flipped a switch on the roof of the cockpit,,and it was the "fasten seat belt" sign you can see on the wall.,(Laughter),And only from the air did I see the big picture.,Of course, when you're on the ice, you only ever see one obstacle at a time,,whether it's a pressure ridge or there's a bit of water.,This is probably why I didn't get into trouble about the length of my airstrip.,I mean, it really was starting to break up. 
 Why? I'm not an explorer in the traditional sense.,I'm not skiing along drawing maps;,everyone knows where the North Pole is.,At the South Pole there's a big scientific base. There's an airstrip.,There's a cafe and there's a tourist shop.,For me, this is about exploring human limits,,about exploring the limits of physiology, of psychology,and of technology. They're the things that excite me.,And it's also about potential, on a personal level.,This, for me, is a chance to explore the limits --,really push the limits of my own potential, see how far they stretch.,And on a wider scale, it amazes me how people go through life,just scratching the surface of their potential,,just doing three or four or five percent,of what they're truly capable of. So,,on a wider scale, I hope that this journey,was a chance to inspire other people,to think about what they want to do,with their potential, and what they want to do with the tiny amount of time,we each have on this planet.,That's as close as I can come to summing that up. 
 The next question is, how do you answer the call of nature at minus 40?,The answer, of course, to which is a trade secret --,and the last question,,what's next? As quickly as possible,,if I have a minute left at the end, I'll go into more detail.,What's next:,Antarctica.,It's the coldest, highest,,windiest and driest continent on Earth.,Late 1911, early 1912,,there was a race to be the first,to the South Pole: the heart of the Antarctic continent.,If you include the coastal ice shelves, you can see that the Ross Ice Shelf --,it's the big one down here -- the Ross Ice Shelf is the size of France.,Antarctica, if you include the ice shelves,,is twice the size of Australia -- it's a big place.,And there's a race to get to the Pole between Amundsen,,the Norwegian -- Amundsen had dog sleds and huskies --,and Scott, the British guy, Captain Scott.,Scott had sort of ponies and some tractors,and a few dogs, all of which went wrong,,and Scott and his team of four people ended up on foot.,They got to the Pole late January 1912,to find a Norwegian flag already there.,There was a tent, a letter to the Norwegian king.,And they turned around, headed back to the coast,,and all five of them died on the return journey.,Since then, no one has ever skied --,this was 93 years ago -- since then, no one has ever skied,from the coast of Antarctica to the Pole and back.,Every South Pole expedition you may have heard about,is either flown out from the Pole or has used vehicles,or dogs or kites to do some kind of crossing --,no one has ever made a return journey. So that's the plan.,Two of us are doing it.,That's pretty much it. 
 One final thought before I get to the toilet bit, is --,is, I have a -- and I meant to scan this and I've forgotten --,but I have a -- I have a school report. I was 13 years old,,and it's framed above my desk at home. It says,,"Ben lacks sufficient impetus,to achieve anything worthwhile.",(Laughter),(Applause),I think if I've learned anything, it's this: that no one else,is the authority on your potential.,You're the only person that decides how far you go and what you're capable of.,Ladies and gentlemen, that's my story.,Thank you very much.Well, as Alexander Graham Bell famously said,on his first successful telephone call,,"Hello, is that Domino's Pizza?",(Laughter),I just really want to thank you very much.,As another famous man, Jerry Garcia, said,,"What a strange, long trip.",And he should have said,,"What a strange, long trip it's about to become.",At this very moment, you are viewing my upper half.,My lower half is appearing at a different conference,(Laughter),in a different country.,You can, it turns out, be in two places at once.,But still, I'm sorry I can't be with you in person.,I'll explain at another time. 
 And though I'm a rock star,,I just want to assure you that none of my wishes will include a hot tub.,But what really turns me on about technology,is not just the ability to get more songs on MP3 players.,The revolution -- this revolution -- is much bigger than that.,I hope, I believe.,What turns me on about the digital age,,what excites me personally,,is that you have closed the gap between dreaming and doing.,You see, it used to be that if you wanted to make a record of a song,,you needed a studio and a producer.,Now, you need a laptop.,If you wanted to make a film, you needed a mass of equipment,and a Hollywood budget.,Now, you need a camera that fits in your palm,,and a couple of bucks for a blank DVD.,Imagination has been decoupled from the old constraints.,And that really, really excites me.,I'm excited when I glimpse that kind of thinking writ large. 
 What I would like to see is idealism decoupled from all constraints.,Political, economic, psychological, whatever.,The geopolitical world has got a lot to learn from the digital world.,From the ease with which you swept away obstacles,that no one knew could even be budged.,And that's actually what I'd like to talk about today.,First, though, I should probably explain why, and how,,I got to this place.,It's a journey that started 20 years ago.,You may remember that song, "We Are the World,",or, "Do They Know It's Christmas?",Band Aid, Live Aid.,Another very tall, grizzled rock star, my friend Sir Bob Geldof,,issued a challenge to "feed the world.",It was a great moment, and it utterly changed my life.,That summer, my wife, Ali, and myself went to Ethiopia.,We went on the quiet to see for ourselves what was going on.,We lived in Ethiopia for a month, working at an orphanage.,The children had a name for me.,They called me, "The girl with the beard." 
 (Laughter) 
 Don't ask.,Anyway, we found Africa to be a magical place.,Big skies, big hearts, big, shining continent.,Beautiful, royal people.,Anybody who ever gave anything to Africa got a lot more back.,Ethiopia didn't just blow my mind; it opened my mind.,Anyway, on our last day at this orphanage,a man handed me his baby and said,,"Would you take my son with you?",He knew, in Ireland, that his son would live,,and that in Ethiopia, his son would die.,It was the middle of that awful famine.,Well, I turned him down.,And it was a funny kind of sick feeling, but I turned him down.,And it's a feeling I can't ever quite forget.,And in that moment, I started this journey. 
 In that moment, I became the worst thing of all:,I became a rock star with a cause. (Laughter),Except this isn't the cause, is it?,Six-and-a-half thousand Africans dying every single day from AIDS --,a preventable, treatable disease --,for lack of drugs we can get in any pharmacy.,That's not a cause. That's an emergency.,11 million AIDS orphans in Africa,,20 million by the end of the decade.,That's not a cause. That's an emergency.,Today, every day, 9,000 more Africans,will catch HIV because of stigmatization and lack of education.,That's not a cause. That's an emergency.,So what we're talking about here is human rights.,The right to live like a human.,The right to live, period.,And what we're facing in Africa is,an unprecedented threat to human dignity and equality. 
 The next thing I'd like to be clear about is what this problem is,,and what this problem isn't.,Because this is not all about charity.,This is about justice. Really.,This is not about charity. This is about justice.,That's right.,And that's too bad, because we're very good at charity.,Americans, like Irish people, are good at it.,Even the poorest neighborhoods give more than they can afford.,We like to give, and we give a lot.,Look at the response to the tsunami -- it's inspiring.,But justice is a tougher standard than charity.,You see, Africa makes a fool of our idea of justice.,It makes a farce of our idea of equality.,It mocks our pieties. It doubts our concern.,It questions our commitment.,Because there is no way we can look at what's happening in Africa,,and if we're honest,,conclude that it would ever be allowed to happen anywhere else. 
 As you heard in the film, anywhere else, not here.,Not here, not in America, not in Europe.,In fact, a head of state that you're all familiar with,admitted this to me. And it's really true.,There is no chance this kind of hemorrhaging of human life,would be accepted anywhere else other than Africa.,Africa is a continent in flames.,And deep down, if we really accepted that Africans were equal to us,,we would all do more to put the fire out.,We're standing around with watering cans,,when what we really need is the fire brigade. 
 You see, it's not as dramatic as the tsunami.,It's crazy, really, when you think about it.,Does stuff have to look like an action movie these days,to exist in the front of our brain?,The slow extinguishing of countless lives,is just not dramatic enough, it would appear.,Catastrophes that we can avert,are not as interesting as ones we could avert.,Funny, that.,Anyway, I believe that that kind of thinking,offends the intellectual rigor in this room.,Six-and-a-half thousand people dying a day in Africa may be Africa's crisis,,but the fact that it's not on the nightly news,,that we in Europe, or you in America,,are not treating it like an emergency --,I want to argue with you tonight that that's our crisis.,I want to argue that though Africa is not the front line in the war against terror,,it could be soon.,Every week, religious extremists take another African village.,They're attempting to bring order to chaos.,Well, why aren't we? 
 Poverty breeds despair. We know this.,Despair breeds violence. We know this.,In turbulent times, isn't it cheaper, and smarter,,to make friends out of potential enemies,than to defend yourself against them later?,"The war against terror is bound up in the war against poverty.",And I didn't say that. Colin Powell said that.,Now when the military are telling us that this is a war,that cannot be won by military might alone,,maybe we should listen.,There's an opportunity here, and it's real.,It's not spin. It's not wishful thinking.,The problems facing the developing world,afford us in the developed world,a chance to re-describe ourselves to the world.,We will not only transform other people's lives,,but we will also transform the way those other lives see us.,And that might be smart in these nervous, dangerous times. 
 Don't you think that on a purely commercial level,,that anti-retroviral drugs are great advertisements,for Western ingenuity and technology?,Doesn't compassion look well on us?,And let's cut the crap for a second.,In certain quarters of the world, brand EU, brand USA,,is not at its shiniest.,The neon sign is fizzing and cracking.,Someone's put a brick through the window.,The regional branch managers are getting nervous.,Never before have we in the west been so scrutinized.,Our values: do we have any?,Our credibility?,These things are under attack around the world.,Brand USA could use some polishing.,And I say that as a fan, you know?,As a person who buys the products.,But think about it.,More anti-retrovirals make sense.,But that's just the easy part, or ought to be. 
 But equality for Africa --,that's a big, expensive idea.,You see, the scale of the suffering numbs us into a kind of indifference.,What on earth can we all do about this?,Well, much more than we think.,We can't fix every problem, but the ones we can,,I want to argue, we must.,And because we can, we must.,This is the straight truth, the righteous truth.,It is not a theory.,The fact is that ours is the first generation,that can look disease and extreme poverty in the eye,,look across the ocean to Africa, and say this, and mean it:,we do not have to stand for this.,A whole continent written off -- we do not have to stand for this. 
 (Applause) 
 And let me say this without a trace of irony --,before I back it up to a bunch of ex-hippies.,Forget the '60s. We can change the world.,I can't; you can't, as individuals; but we can change the world.,I really believe that, the people in this room.,Look at the Gates Foundation.,They've done incredible stuff, unbelievable stuff.,But working together, we can actually change the world.,We can turn the inevitable outcomes,,and transform the quality of life for millions of lives,who look and feel rather like us, when you're up close.,I'm sorry to laugh here, but you do look so different,than you did in Haight-Ashbury in the '60s. 
 (Laughter) 
 But I want to argue that this is the moment that you are designed for.,It is the flowering of the seeds you planted,in earlier, headier days.,Ideas that you gestated in your youth.,This is what excites me.,This room was born for this moment,,is really what I want to say to you tonight.,Most of you started out wanting to change the world, didn't you?,Most of you did, the digital world.,Well, now, actually because of you,,it is possible to change the physical world.,It's a fact.,Economists confirm it, and they know much more than I do.,So why, then, are we not pumping our fists into the air?,Probably because when we admit we can do something about it,,we've got to do something about it.,It is a pain in the arse.,This equality business is actually a pain in the arse.,But for the first time in history, we have the technology;,we have the know-how; we have the cash;,we have the life-saving drugs. 
 Do we have the will?,I hope this is obvious, but I'm not a hippie.,And I'm not really one for the warm, fuzzy feeling.,I do not have flowers in my hair.,Actually, I come from punk rock.,The Clash wore big army boots, not sandals.,But I know toughness when I see it.,And for all the talk of peace and love on the West Coast,,there was muscle to the movement that started out here.,You see, idealism detached from action is just a dream.,But idealism allied with pragmatism,,with rolling up your sleeves and making the world bend a bit,,is very exciting. It's very real. It's very strong.,And it's very present in a crowd like you. 
 Last year at DATA, this organization I helped set up,,we launched a campaign to summon this spirit,in the fight against AIDS and extreme poverty.,We're calling it the ONE Campaign.,It's based on our belief that the action of one person,can change a lot,,but the actions of many coming together as one,can change the world.,Well, we feel that now is the time to prove we're right.,There are moments in history when civilization redefines itself.,We believe this is one.,We believe that this could be the time when the world finally decides,that the wanton loss of life in Africa is just no longer acceptable.,This could be the time that we finally get serious,about changing the future for most people who live on planet Earth. 
 Momentum has been building.,Lurching a little, but it's building.,This year is a test for us all,,especially the leaders of the G8 nations,,who really are on the line here,,with all the world in history watching.,I have been, of late, disappointed with the Bush Administration.,They started out with such promise on Africa.,They made some really great promises,,and actually have fulfilled a lot of them.,But some of them they haven't.,They don't feel the push from the ground, is the truth.,But my disappointment has much more perspective,when I talk to American people,,and I hear their worries about the deficit,,and the fiscal well being of their country.,I understand that.,But there's much more push from the ground than you'd think,,if we got organized. 
 What I try to communicate, and you can help me if you agree,,is that aid for Africa is just great value for money,at a time when America really needs it.,Putting it in the crassest possible terms,,the investment reaps huge returns.,Not only in lives saved, but in goodwill, stability,and security that we'll gain.,So this is what I hope that you will do, if I could be so bold,,and not have it deducted from my number of wishes. 
 (Laughter) 
 What I hope is that beyond individual merciful acts,,that you will tell the politicians to do right by Africa,,by America and by the world.,Give them permission, if you like,,to spend their political capital and your financial capital,,your national purse on saving the lives of millions of people.,That's really what I would like you to do.,Because we also need your intellectual capital:,your ideas, your skills, your ingenuity.,And you, at this conference, are in a unique position.,Some of the technologies we've been talking about, you invented them,,or at least revolutionized the way that they're used.,Together you have changed the zeitgeist from analog to digital,,and pushed the boundaries.,And we'd like you to give us that energy.,Give us that kind of dreaming, that kind of doing. 
 As I say, there're two things on the line here.,There's the continent Africa.,But there's also our sense of ourselves.,People are starting to figure this out.,Movements are springing up.,Artists, politicians, pop stars, priests, CEOs,,NGOs, mothers' unions, student unions.,A lot of people are getting together, and working,under this umbrella I told you about earlier, the ONE Campaign.,I think they just have one idea in their mind,,which is, where you live in the world,should not determine whether you live in the world. 
 (Applause) 
 History, like God, is watching what we do.,When the history books get written,,I think our age will be remembered for three things.,Really, it's just three things this whole age will be remembered for.,The digital revolution, yes.,The war against terror, yes.,And what we did or did not do to put out the fires in Africa.,Some say we can't afford to. I say we can't afford not to.,Thank you, thank you very much. 
 (Applause) 
 Okay, my three wishes.,The ones that TED has offered to grant.,You see, if this is true, and I believe it is,,that the digital world you all created has uncoupled,the creative imagination from the physical constraints of matter,,this should be a piece of piss. 
 (Laughter) 
 I should add that this started out as a much longer list of wishes.,Most of them impossible, some of them impractical,and one or two of them certainly immoral. 
 (Laughter) 
 This business, it gets to be addictive, you know what I mean,,when somebody else is picking up the tab.,Anyway, here's number one.,I wish for you to help build a social movement,of more than one million American activists for Africa.,That is my first wish.,I believe it's possible.,A few minutes ago, I talked about all the citizens' campaigns that are springing up.,You know, there's lots out there.,And with this one campaign as our umbrella,,my organization, DATA, and other groups,,have been tapping into the energy and the enthusiasm,that's out there from Hollywood into the heartland of America.,We know there's more than enough energy to power this movement.,We just need your help in making it happen. 
 We want all of you here, church America, corporate America,,Microsoft America, Apple America, Coke America,,Pepsi America, nerd America, noisy America.,We can't afford to be cool and sit this one out.,I do believe if we build a movement that's one million Americans strong,,we're not going to be denied.,We will have the ear of Congress.,We'll be the first page in Condi Rice's briefing book,,and right into the Oval Office.,If there's one million Americans -- and I really know this --,who are ready to make phone calls,,who are ready to be on email,,I am absolutely sure that we can actually change,the course of history, literally, for the continent of Africa.,Anyway, so I'd like your help in getting that signed up.,I know John Gage and Sun Microsystems are already on board for this,,but there's lots of you we'd like to talk to. 
 Right, my second wish, number two.,I would like one media hit for every person on the planet,who is living on less than one dollar a day.,That's one billion media hits.,Could be on Google, could be on AOL.,Steve Case, Larry, Sergey -- they've done a lot already.,It could be NBC. It could be ABC.,Actually we're talking to ABC today about the Oscars.,We have a film, produced by Jon Kamen at Radical Media.,But you know, we want, we need some airtime for our ideas.,We need to get the math; we need to get the statistics out to the American people.,I really believe that old Truman line,,that if you give the American people the facts,,they'll do the right thing.,And, the other thing that's important is that this is not Sally Struthers.,This has to be described as an adventure, not a burden. 
 (Video): One by one they step forward,,a nurse, a teacher, a homemaker,,and lives are saved.,The problem is enormous.,Every three seconds one person dies.,Another three seconds, one more.,The situation is so desperate in parts of Africa,,Asia, even America,,that aid groups, just as they did for the tsunami,,are uniting as one, acting as one.,We can beat extreme poverty, starvation, AIDS.,But we need your help.,One more person, letter, voice,will mean the difference between life and death,for millions of people.,Please join us by working together.,Americans have an unprecedented opportunity.,We can make history.,We can start to make poverty history.,One, by one, by one.,Please visit ONE at this address.,We're not asking for your money. We're asking for your voice. 
 Bono: All right. I wish for TED to truly show the power of information,,its power to rewrite the rules and transform lives,,by connecting every hospital, health clinic and school,in one African country.,And I would like it to be Ethiopia.,I believe we can connect every school in Ethiopia,,every health clinic, every hospital --,we can connect to the Internet.,That is my wish, my third wish.,I think it's possible.,I think we have the money and brains in the room to do that.,And that would be a mind-blowing wish to come true.,I've been to Ethiopia, as I said earlier.,It's actually where it all started for me.,The idea that the Internet, which changed all of our lives,,can transform a country -- and a continent,that has hardly made it to analog, let alone digital -- blows my mind.,But it didn't start out that way. 
 The first long-distance line from Boston to New York,was used in 1885 on the phone.,It was just nine years later that Addis Ababa,was connected by phone to Harare, which is 500 kilometers away.,Since then, not that much has changed.,The average waiting time to get a landline in Ethiopia,is actually about seven or eight years.,But wireless technology wasn't dreamt up then.,Anyway, I'm Irish, and as you can see,,I know how important talking is.,Communication is very important for Ethiopia -- will transform the country.,Nurses getting better training,,pharmacists being able to order supplies,,doctors sharing their expertise in all aspects of medicine.,It's a very, very good idea to get them wired.,And that is my third and final wish for you at the TED conference.,Thank you very much once again. 
 (Applause)At the break, I was asked by several people,about my comments about the aging debate.,And this will be my only comment on it.,And that is, I understand,that optimists greatly outlive pessimists.,(Laughter) 
 What I'm going to tell you about in my 18 minutes is,how we're about to switch from reading the genetic code,to the first stages of beginning,to write the code ourselves.,It's only 10 years ago this month,when we published the first sequence,of a free-living organism,,that of haemophilus influenzae.,That took a genome project,from 13 years down to four months.,We can now do that same genome project,in the order of,two to eight hours.,So in the last decade, a large number of genomes have been added:,most human pathogens,,a couple of plants,,several insects and several mammals,,including the human genome.,Genomics at this stage of the thinking,from a little over 10 years ago,was, by the end of this year, we might have,between three and five genomes sequenced;,it's on the order of several hundred.,We just got a grant from the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation,to sequence 130 genomes this year,,as a side project from environmental organisms.,So the rate of reading the genetic code has changed. 
 But as we look, what's out there,,we've barely scratched the surface,on what is available on this planet.,Most people don't realize it, because they're invisible,,but microbes make up about a half of the Earth's biomass,,whereas all animals only make up about,one one-thousandth of all the biomass.,And maybe it's something that people in Oxford don't do very often,,but if you ever make it to the sea,,and you swallow a mouthful of seawater,,keep in mind that each milliliter,has about a million bacteria,and on the order of 10 million viruses. 
 Less than 5,000 microbial species,have been characterized as of two years ago,,and so we decided to do something about it.,And we started the Sorcerer II Expedition,,where we were, as with great oceanographic expeditions,,trying to sample the ocean every 200 miles.,We started in Bermuda for our test project,,then moved up to Halifax,,working down the U.S. East Coast,,the Caribbean Sea, the Panama Canal,,through to the Galapagos, then across the Pacific,,and we're in the process now of working our way,across the Indian Ocean.,It's very tough duty; we're doing this on a sailing vessel,,in part to help excite young people,about going into science.,The experiments are incredibly simple.,We just take seawater and we filter it,,and we collect different size organisms on different filters,,and then take their DNA back to our lab in Rockville,,where we can sequence a hundred million letters,of the genetic code every 24 hours.,And with doing this,,we've made some amazing discoveries. 
 For example, it was thought that the visual pigments,that are in our eyes -- there was only one or two organisms,in the environment that had these same pigments.,It turns out, almost every species,in the upper parts of the ocean,in warm parts of the world,have these same photoreceptors,,and use sunlight as the source of their energy,and communication.,From one site, from one barrel of seawater,,we discovered 1.3 million new genes,and as many as 50,000 new species. 
 We've extended this to the air,now with a grant from the Sloan Foundation.,We're measuring how many viruses and bacteria,all of us are breathing in and out every day,,particularly on airplanes,or closed auditoriums.,(Laughter),We filter through some simple apparatuses;,we collect on the order of a billion microbes from just a day,filtering on top of a building in New York City.,And we're in the process of sequencing all that,at the present time. 
 Just on the data collection side,,just where we are through the Galapagos,,we're finding that almost every 200 miles,,we see tremendous diversity,in the samples in the ocean.,Some of these make logical sense,,in terms of different temperature gradients.,So this is a satellite photograph,based on temperatures -- red being warm,,blue being cold --,and we found there's a tremendous difference between,the warm water samples and the cold water samples,,in terms of abundant species.,The other thing that surprised us quite a bit,is these photoreceptors detect different wavelengths of light,,and we can predict that based on their amino acid sequence.,And these vary tremendously from region to region.,Maybe not surprisingly,,in the deep ocean, where it's mostly blue,,the photoreceptors tend to see blue light.,When there's a lot of chlorophyll around,,they see a lot of green light.,But they vary even more,,possibly moving towards infrared and ultraviolet,in the extremes. 
 Just to try and get an assessment,of what our gene repertoire was,,we assembled all the data --,including all of ours thus far from the expedition,,which represents more than half of all the gene data on the planet --,and it totaled around 29 million genes.,And we tried to put these into gene families,to see what these discoveries are:,Are we just discovering new members of known families,,or are we discovering new families?,And it turns out we have about 50,000,major gene families,,but every new sample we take in the environment,adds in a linear fashion to these new families.,So we're at the earliest stages of discovery,about basic genes,,components and life on this planet. 
 When we look at the so-called evolutionary tree,,we're up on the upper right-hand corner with the animals.,Of those roughly 29 million genes,,we only have around 24,000,in our genome.,And if you take all animals together,,we probably share less than 30,000,and probably maybe a dozen,or more thousand different gene families.,I view that these genes are now,not only the design components of evolution.,And we think in a gene-centric view --,maybe going back to Richard Dawkins' ideas --,than in a genome-centric view,,which are different constructs of these gene components. 
 Synthetic DNA, the ability to synthesize DNA,,has changed at sort of the same pace,that DNA sequencing has,over the last decade or two,,and is getting very rapid and very cheap.,Our first thought about synthetic genomics came,when we sequenced the second genome back in 1995,,and that from mycoplasma genitalium.,And we have really nice T-shirts that say,,you know, "I heart my genitalium.",This is actually just a microorganism.,But it has roughly 500 genes.,Haemophilus had 1,800 genes.,And we simply asked the question,,if one species needs 800, another 500,,is there a smaller set of genes,that might comprise a minimal operating system? 
 So we started doing transposon mutagenesis.,Transposons are just small pieces of DNA,that randomly insert in the genetic code.,And if they insert in the middle of the gene, they disrupt its function.,So we made a map of all the genes,that could take transposon insertions,and we called those "non-essential genes.",But it turns out the environment is very critical for this,,and you can only,define an essential or non-essential gene,based on exactly what's in the environment.,We also tried to take a more directly intellectual approach,with the genomes of 13 related organisms,,and we tried to compare all of those, to see what they had in common.,And we got these overlapping circles. And we found only 173 genes,common to all 13 organisms.,The pool expanded a little bit if we ignored,one intracellular parasite;,it expanded even more,when we looked at core sets of genes,of around 310 or so.,So we think that we can expand,or contract genomes, depending on your point of view here,,to maybe 300 to 400 genes,from the minimal of 500. 
 The only way to prove these ideas,was to construct an artificial chromosome with those genes in them,,and we had to do this in a cassette-based fashion.,We found that synthesizing accurate DNA,in large pieces was extremely difficult.,Ham Smith and Clyde Hutchison, my colleagues on this,,developed an exciting new method,that allowed us to synthesize a 5,000-base pair virus,in only a two-week period,that was 100 percent accurate,,in terms of its sequence and its biology.,It was a quite exciting experiment -- when we just took the synthetic piece of DNA,,injected it in the bacteria and all of a sudden,,that DNA started driving the production of the virus particles,that turned around and then killed the bacteria.,This was not the first synthetic virus --,a polio virus had been made a year before --,but it was only one ten-thousandth as active,and it took three years to do.,This is a cartoon of the structure of phi X 174.,This is a case where the software now builds its own hardware,,and that's the notions that we have with biology. 
 People immediately jump to concerns about biological warfare,,and I had recent testimony before a Senate committee,,and a special committee the U.S. government has set up,to review this area.,And I think it's important to keep reality in mind,,versus what happens with people's imaginations.,Basically, any virus that's been sequenced today --,that genome can be made.,And people immediately freak out about things about Ebola or smallpox,,but the DNA from this organism is not infective.,So even if somebody made the smallpox genome,,that DNA itself would not cause infections.,The real concern that security departments have,is designer viruses.,And there's only two countries, the U.S. and the former Soviet Union,,that had major efforts,on trying to create biological warfare agents.,If that research is truly discontinued,,there should be very little activity,on the know-how to make designer viruses in the future. 
 I think single-cell organisms are possible within two years.,And possibly eukaryotic cells,,those that we have,,are possible within a decade.,So we're now making several dozen different constructs,,because we can vary the cassettes and the genes,that go into this artificial chromosome.,The key is, how do you put all of the others?,We start with these fragments,,and then we have a homologous recombination system,that reassembles those into a chromosome. 
 This is derived from an organism, deinococcus radiodurans,,that can take three million rads of radiation and not be killed.,It reassembles its genome after this radiation burst,in about 12 to 24 hours,,after its chromosomes are literally blown apart.,This organism is ubiquitous on the planet,,and exists perhaps now,in outer space due to all our travel there.,This is a glass beaker after,about half a million rads of radiation.,The glass started to burn and crack,,while the microbes sitting in the bottom,just got happier and happier.,Here's an actual picture of what happens:,the top of this shows the genome,after 1.7 million rads of radiation.,The chromosome is literally blown apart.,And here's that same DNA automatically reassembled,24 hours later.,It's truly stunning that these organisms can do that,,and we probably have thousands,,if not tens of thousands, of different species,on this planet that are capable of doing that.,After these genomes are synthesized,,the first step is just transplanting them,into a cell without a genome. 
 So we think synthetic cells are going to have tremendous potential,,not only for understanding the basis of biology,but for hopefully environmental and society issues.,For example, from the third organism we sequenced,,Methanococcus jannaschii -- it lives in boiling water temperatures;,its energy source is hydrogen,and all its carbon comes from CO2 it captures back from the environment.,So we know lots of different pathways,,thousands of different organisms now,that live off of CO2,,and can capture that back.,So instead of using carbon from oil,for synthetic processes,,we have the chance of using carbon,and capturing it back from the atmosphere,,converting that into biopolymers,or other products.,We have one organism that lives off of carbon monoxide,,and we use as a reducing power,to split water to produce hydrogen and oxygen.,Also, there's numerous pathways,that can be engineered metabolizing methane.,And DuPont has a major program with Statoil in Norway,to capture and convert the methane,from the gas fields there into useful products. 
 Within a short while, I think there's going to be a new field,called "Combinatorial Genomics,",because with these new synthesis capabilities,,these vast gene array repertoires,and the homologous recombination,,we think we can design a robot to make,maybe a million different chromosomes a day.,And therefore, as with all biology,,you get selection through screening,,whether you're screening for hydrogen production,,or chemical production, or just viability.,To understand the role of these genes,is going to be well within reach. 
 We're trying to modify photosynthesis,to produce hydrogen directly from sunlight.,Photosynthesis is modulated by oxygen,,and we have an oxygen-insensitive hydrogenase,that we think will totally change this process.,We're also combining cellulases,,the enzymes that break down complex sugars into simple sugars,and fermentation in the same cell,for producing ethanol.,Pharmaceutical production is already under way,in major laboratories,using microbes.,The chemistry from compounds in the environment,is orders of magnitude more complex,than our best chemists can produce.,I think future engineered species,could be the source of food,,hopefully a source of energy,,environmental remediation,and perhaps,replacing the petrochemical industry. 
 Let me just close with ethical and policy studies.,We delayed the start of our experiments in 1999,until we completed a year-and-a-half bioethical review,as to whether we should try and make an artificial species.,Every major religion participated in this.,It was actually a very strange study,,because the various religious leaders were using their scriptures as law books,,and they couldn't find anything in them prohibiting making life,,so it must be OK. The only ultimate concerns,were biological warfare aspects of this,,but gave us the go ahead to start these experiments,for the reasons we were doing them. 
 Right now the Sloan Foundation has just funded,a multi-institutional study on this,,to work out what the risk and benefits to society are,,and the rules that scientific teams such as my own,should be using in this area,,and we're trying to set good examples as we go forward.,These are complex issues.,Except for the threat of bio-terrorism,,they're very simple issues in terms of,,can we design things to produce clean energy,,perhaps revolutionizing,what developing countries can do,and provide through various simple processes.,Thank you very much.It is a thrill to be here at a conference,that's devoted to "Inspired by Nature" -- you can imagine.,And I'm also thrilled to be in the foreplay section.,Did you notice this section is foreplay?,Because I get to talk about one of my favorite critters,,which is the Western Grebe. You haven't lived,until you've seen these guys do their courtship dance.,I was on Bowman Lake in Glacier National Park,,which is a long, skinny lake with sort of mountains upside down in it,,and my partner and I have a rowing shell.,And so we were rowing, and one of these Western Grebes came along.,And what they do for their courtship dance is, they go together,,the two of them, the two mates, and they begin to run underwater.,They paddle faster, and faster, and faster, until they're going so fast,that they literally lift up out of the water,,and they're standing upright, sort of paddling the top of the water.,And one of these Grebes came along while we were rowing.,And so we're in a skull, and we're moving really, really quickly.,And this Grebe, I think, sort of, mistaked us for a prospect,,and started to run along the water next to us,,in a courtship dance -- for miles.,It would stop, and then start, and then stop, and then start.,Now that is foreplay.,(Laughter) 
 I came this close to changing species at that moment.,Obviously, life can teach us something,in the entertainment section. Life has a lot to teach us.,But what I'd like to talk about today,is what life might teach us in technology and in design.,What's happened since the book came out --,the book was mainly about research in biomimicry --,and what's happened since then is architects, designers, engineers --,people who make our world -- have started to call and say,,we want a biologist to sit at the design table,to help us, in real time, become inspired.,Or -- and this is the fun part for me -- we want you to take us out,into the natural world. We'll come with a design challenge,and we find the champion adapters in the natural world, who might inspire us. 
 So this is a picture from a Galapagos trip that we took,with some wastewater treatment engineers; they purify wastewater.,And some of them were very resistant, actually, to being there.,What they said to us at first was, you know, we already do biomimicry.,We use bacteria to clean our water. And we said,,well, that's not exactly being inspired by nature.,That's bioprocessing, you know; that's bio-assisted technology:,using an organism to do your wastewater treatment,is an old, old technology called "domestication.",This is learning something, learning an idea, from an organism and then applying it.,And so they still weren't getting it. 
 So we went for a walk on the beach and I said,,well, give me one of your big problems. Give me a design challenge,,sustainability speed bump, that's keeping you from being sustainable.,And they said scaling, which is the build-up of minerals inside of pipes.,And they said, you know what happens is, mineral --,just like at your house -- mineral builds up.,And then the aperture closes, and we have to flush the pipes with toxins,,or we have to dig them up.,So if we had some way to stop this scaling --,and so I picked up some shells on the beach. And I asked them,,what is scaling? What's inside your pipes?,And they said, calcium carbonate.,And I said, that's what this is; this is calcium carbonate. 
 And they didn't know that.,They didn't know that what a seashell is,,it's templated by proteins, and then ions from the seawater,crystallize in place to create a shell.,So the same sort of a process, without the proteins,,is happening on the inside of their pipes. They didn't know.,This is not for lack of information; it's a lack of integration.,You know, it's a silo, people in silos. They didn't know,that the same thing was happening. So one of them thought about it,and said, OK, well, if this is just crystallization,that happens automatically out of seawater -- self-assembly --,then why aren't shells infinite in size? What stops the scaling?,Why don't they just keep on going?,And I said, well, in the same way,that they exude a protein and it starts the crystallization --,and then they all sort of leaned in --,they let go of a protein that stops the crystallization.,It literally adheres to the growing face of the crystal.,And, in fact, there is a product called TPA,that's mimicked that protein -- that stop-protein --,and it's an environmentally friendly way to stop scaling in pipes. 
 That changed everything. From then on,,you could not get these engineers back in the boat.,The first day they would take a hike,,and it was, click, click, click, click. Five minutes later they were back in the boat.,We're done. You know, I've seen that island.,After this,,they were crawling all over. They would snorkel,for as long as we would let them snorkel.,What had happened was that they realized that there were organisms,out there that had already solved the problems,that they had spent their careers trying to solve. 
 Learning about the natural world is one thing;,learning from the natural world -- that's the switch.,That's the profound switch.,What they realized was that the answers to their questions are everywhere;,they just needed to change the lenses with which they saw the world.,3.8 billion years of field-testing.,10 to 30 -- Craig Venter will probably tell you;,I think there's a lot more than 30 million -- well-adapted solutions.,The important thing for me is that these are solutions solved in context.,And the context is the Earth --,the same context that we're trying to solve our problems in.,So it's the conscious emulation of life's genius.,It's not slavishly mimicking --,although Al is trying to get the hairdo going --,it's not a slavish mimicry; it's taking the design principles,,the genius of the natural world, and learning something from it. 
 Now, in a group with so many IT people, I do have to mention what,I'm not going to talk about, and that is that your field,is one that has learned an enormous amount from living things,,on the software side. So there's computers that protect themselves,,like an immune system, and we're learning from gene regulation,and biological development. And we're learning from neural nets,,genetic algorithms, evolutionary computing.,That's on the software side. But what's interesting to me,is that we haven't looked at this, as much. I mean, these machines,are really not very high tech in my estimation,in the sense that there's dozens and dozens of carcinogens,in the water in Silicon Valley.,So the hardware,is not at all up to snuff in terms of what life would call a success.,So what can we learn about making -- not just computers, but everything?,The plane you came in, cars, the seats that you're sitting on.,How do we redesign the world that we make, the human-made world?,More importantly, what should we ask in the next 10 years?,And there's a lot of cool technologies out there that life has. 
 What's the syllabus?,Three questions, for me, are key.,How does life make things?,This is the opposite; this is how we make things.,It's called heat, beat and treat --,that's what material scientists call it.,And it's carving things down from the top, with 96 percent waste left over,and only 4 percent product. You heat it up; you beat it with high pressures;,you use chemicals. OK. Heat, beat and treat. 
 Life can't afford to do that. How does life make things?,How does life make the most of things?,That's a geranium pollen.,And its shape is what gives it the function of being able,to tumble through air so easily. Look at that shape.,Life adds information to matter.,In other words: structure.,It gives it information. By adding information to matter,,it gives it a function that's different than without that structure.,And thirdly, how does life make things disappear into systems?,Because life doesn't really deal in things;,there are no things in the natural world divorced,from their systems.,Really quick syllabus.,As I'm reading more and more now, and following the story,,there are some amazing things coming up in the biological sciences.,And at the same time, I'm listening to a lot of businesses,and finding what their sort of grand challenges are.,The two groups are not talking to each other.,At all. 
 What in the world of biology might be helpful at this juncture,,to get us through this sort of evolutionary knothole that we're in?,I'm going to try to go through 12, really quickly. 
 One that's exciting to me is self-assembly.,Now, you've heard about this in terms of nanotechnology.,Back to that shell: the shell is a self-assembling material.,On the lower left there is a picture of mother of pearl,forming out of seawater. It's a layered structure that's mineral,and then polymer, and it makes it very, very tough.,It's twice as tough as our high-tech ceramics.,But what's really interesting: unlike our ceramics that are in kilns,,it happens in seawater. It happens near, in and near, the organism's body.,This is Sandia National Labs.,A guy named Jeff Brinker,has found a way to have a self-assembling coding process.,Imagine being able to make ceramics at room temperature,by simply dipping something into a liquid,,lifting it out of the liquid, and having evaporation,force the molecules in the liquid together,,so that they jigsaw together,in the same way as this crystallization works.,Imagine making all of our hard materials that way.,Imagine spraying the precursors to a PV cell, to a solar cell,,onto a roof, and having it self-assemble into a layered structure that harvests light. 
 Here's an interesting one for the IT world:,bio-silicon. This is a diatom, which is made of silicates.,And so silicon, which we make right now --,it's part of our carcinogenic problem in the manufacture of our chips --,this is a bio-mineralization process that's now being mimicked.,This is at UC Santa Barbara. Look at these diatoms.,This is from Ernst Haeckel's work.,Imagine being able to -- and, again, it's a templated process,,and it solidifies out of a liquid process -- imagine being able to have that,sort of structure coming out at room temperature.,Imagine being able to make perfect lenses.,On the left, this is a brittle star; it's covered with lenses,that the people at Lucent Technologies have found,have no distortion whatsoever.,It's one of the most distortion-free lenses we know of.,And there's many of them, all over its entire body.,What's interesting, again, is that it self-assembles.,A woman named Joanna Aizenberg, at Lucent,,is now learning to do this in a low-temperature process to create,these sort of lenses. She's also looking at fiber optics.,That's a sea sponge that has a fiber optic.,Down at the very base of it, there's fiber optics,that work better than ours, actually, to move light,,but you can tie them in a knot; they're incredibly flexible. 
 Here's another big idea: CO2 as a feedstock.,A guy named Geoff Coates, at Cornell, said to himself,,you know, plants do not see CO2 as the biggest poison of our time.,We see it that way. Plants are busy making long chains,of starches and glucose, right, out of CO2. He's found a way --,he's found a catalyst -- and he's found a way to take CO2,and make it into polycarbonates. Biodegradable plastics,out of CO2 -- how plant-like. 
 Solar transformations: the most exciting one.,There are people who are mimicking the energy-harvesting device,inside of purple bacterium, the people at ASU. Even more interesting,,lately, in the last couple of weeks, people have seen,that there's an enzyme called hydrogenase that's able to evolve,hydrogen from proton and electrons, and is able to take hydrogen up --,basically what's happening in a fuel cell, in the anode of a fuel cell,and in a reversible fuel cell.,In our fuel cells, we do it with platinum;,life does it with a very, very common iron.,And a team has now just been able to mimic,that hydrogen-juggling hydrogenase.,That's very exciting for fuel cells --,to be able to do that without platinum. 
 Power of shape: here's a whale. We've seen that the fins of this whale,have tubercles on them. And those little bumps,actually increase efficiency in, for instance,,the edge of an airplane -- increase efficiency by about 32 percent.,Which is an amazing fossil fuel savings,,if we were to just put that on the edge of a wing.,Color without pigments: this peacock is creating color with shape.,Light comes through, it bounces back off the layers;,it's called thin-film interference. Imagine being able,to self-assemble products with the last few layers,playing with light to create color.,Imagine being able to create a shape on the outside of a surface,,so that it's self-cleaning with just water. That's what a leaf does.,See that up-close picture?,That's a ball of water, and those are dirt particles.,And that's an up-close picture of a lotus leaf.,There's a company making a product called Lotusan, which mimics --,when the building facade paint dries, it mimics the bumps,in a self-cleaning leaf, and rainwater cleans the building. 
 Water is going to be our big, grand challenge:,quenching thirst.,Here are two organisms that pull water.,The one on the left is the Namibian beetle pulling water out of fog.,The one on the right is a pill bug -- pulls water out of air,,does not drink fresh water.,Pulling water out of Monterey fog and out of the sweaty air in Atlanta,,before it gets into a building, are key technologies. 
 Separation technologies are going to be extremely important.,What if we were to say, no more hard rock mining?,What if we were to separate out metals from waste streams,,small amounts of metals in water? That's what microbes do;,they chelate metals out of water.,There's a company here in San Francisco called MR3,that is embedding mimics of the microbes' molecules on filters,to mine waste streams.,Green chemistry is chemistry in water.,We do chemistry in organic solvents.,This is a picture of the spinnerets coming out of a spider,and the silk being formed from a spider. Isn't that beautiful?,Green chemistry is replacing our industrial chemistry with nature's recipe book.,It's not easy, because life uses,only a subset of the elements in the periodic table.,And we use all of them, even the toxic ones.,To figure out the elegant recipes that would take the small subset,of the periodic table, and create miracle materials like that cell,,is the task of green chemistry. 
 Timed degradation: packaging that is good,until you don't want it to be good anymore, and dissolves on cue.,That's a mussel you can find in the waters out here,,and the threads holding it to a rock are timed; at exactly two years,,they begin to dissolve. 
 Healing: this is a good one.,That little guy over there is a tardigrade.,There is a problem with vaccines around the world,not getting to patients. And the reason is,that the refrigeration somehow gets broken;,what's called the "cold chain" gets broken.,A guy named Bruce Rosner looked at the tardigrade --,which dries out completely, and yet stays alive for months,and months and months, and is able to regenerate itself.,And he found a way to dry out vaccines --,encase them in the same sort of sugar capsules,as the tardigrade has within its cells --,meaning that vaccines no longer need to be refrigerated.,They can be put in a glove compartment, OK.,Learning from organisms. This is a session about water --,learning about organisms that can do without water,,in order to create a vaccine that lasts and lasts and lasts without refrigeration. 
 I'm not going to get to 12.,But what I am going to do is tell you that the most important thing,,besides all of these adaptations, is the fact that these organisms,have figured out a way to do the amazing things they do,while taking care of the place,that's going to take care of their offspring.,When they're involved in foreplay,,they're thinking about something very, very important --,and that's having their genetic material,remain, 10,000 generations from now.,And that means finding a way to do what they do,without destroying the place that'll take care of their offspring.,That's the biggest design challenge.,Luckily, there are millions and millions of geniuses,willing to gift us with their best ideas.,Good luck having a conversation with them. 
 Thank you. 
 (Applause) 
 Chris Anderson: Talk about foreplay, I -- we need to get to 12, but really quickly. 
 Janine Benyus: Oh really?,CA: Yeah. Just like, you know, like the 10-second version,of 10, 11 and 12. Because we just -- your slides are so gorgeous,,and the ideas are so big, I can't stand to let you go down,without seeing 10, 11 and 12. 
 JB: OK, put this -- OK, I'll just hold this thing. OK, great.,OK, so that's the healing one.,Sensing and responding: feedback is a huge thing.,This is a locust. There can be 80 million of them in a square kilometer,,and yet they don't collide with one another.,And yet we have 3.6 million car collisions a year.,(Laughter),Right. There's a person at Newcastle,who has figured out that it's a very large neuron.,And she's actually figuring out how to make,a collision-avoidance circuitry,based on this very large neuron in the locust. 
 This is a huge and important one, number 11.,And that's the growing fertility.,That means, you know, net fertility farming.,We should be growing fertility. And, oh yes -- we get food, too.,Because we have to grow the capacity of this planet,to create more and more opportunities for life.,And really, that's what other organisms do as well.,In ensemble, that's what whole ecosystems do:,they create more and more opportunities for life.,Our farming has done the opposite.,So, farming based on how a prairie builds soil,,ranching based on how a native ungulate herd,actually increases the health of the range,,even wastewater treatment based on how a marsh,not only cleans the water,,but creates incredibly sparkling productivity. 
 This is the simple design brief. I mean, it looks simple,because the system, over 3.8 billion years, has worked this out.,That is, those organisms that have not been able to figure out,how to enhance or sweeten their places,,are not around to tell us about it.,That's the twelfth one.,Life -- and this is the secret trick; this is the magic trick --,life creates conditions conducive to life.,It builds soil; it cleans air; it cleans water;,it mixes the cocktail of gases that you and I need to live.,And it does that in the middle of having great foreplay,and meeting their needs. So it's not mutually exclusive.,We have to find a way to meet our needs,,while making of this place an Eden. 
 CA: Janine, thank you so much.,(Applause)I don't know about you, but I haven't quite figured out,exactly what technology means in my life.,I've spent the past year thinking about what it really should be about.,Should I be pro-technology? Should I embrace it full arms?,Should I be wary? Like you, I'm very tempted by the latest thing.,But at the other hand, a couple of years ago,I gave up all of my possessions,,sold all my technology -- except for a bicycle --,and rode across 3,000 miles on the U.S. back roads under the power of my one body,,fuelled mostly by Twinkies and junk food. 
 (Laughter) 
 And I've since then tried to keep technology,at arm's length in many ways, so it doesn't master my life.,At the same time, I run a website on cool tools,,where I issue a daily obsession of the latest things in technology.,So I'm still perplexed about what the true meaning of technology is,as it relates to humanity, as it relates to nature,,as it relates to the spiritual.,And I'm not even sure we know what technology is.,And one definition of technology is that which is first recorded.,This is the first example of the modern use of technology that I can find.,It was the suggested syllabus for dealing with,the Applied Arts and Science at Cambridge University in 1829. 
 Before that, obviously, technology didn't exist. But obviously it did.,I like one of the definitions that Alan Kay has for technology.,He says technology is anything that was invented after you were born. 
 (Laughter) 
 So it sums up a lot of what we're talking about.,Danny Hillis actually has an update on that --,he says technology is anything that doesn't quite work yet. 
 (Laughter) 
 Which also, I think, gets into a little bit of our current idea.,But I was interested in another definition of technology.,Something, again, that went back to something more fundamental.,Something that was deeper. And as I struggled to understand that,,I came up with a way of framing the question,that seemed to work for me in my investigations.,And I'm, this morning, going to talk about this for the first time.,So this is a very rough attempt to think out loud. 
 The question that I came up with was this question:,what does technology want? And by that, I don't mean,,does it want chocolate or vanilla? By what it wants, I mean,,what are its inherent trends and biases?,What are its tendencies over time? One way to think about this is,thinking about biological organisms, which we've heard a lot about.,And the trick that Richard Dawkins does, which is to say,,to look at them as simply as genes, as vehicles for genes.,So he's saying, what do genes want? The selfish gene.,And I'm applying a similar trick to say,,what if we looked at the universe in our culture,through the eyes of technology? What does technology want?,Obviously, this in an incomplete question,,just as looking at an organism as only a gene,is an incomplete way of looking at it.,But it's still very, very productive. So I'm attempting to say,,if we take technology's view of the world, what does it want?,And I think once we ask that question,we have to go back, actually, to life. Because obviously,,if we keep extending the origins of technology far back,,I think we come back to life at some point. 
 So that's where I want to begin my little exploration, is in life.,And like you heard from the previous speakers,,we don't really know what life there is on Earth right now.,We have really no idea.,Craig Venter's tremendous and brilliant attempt,to DNA sequence things in the ocean is great.,Brian Farrell's work is all part of this agenda to try,and actually discover all the species on Earth.,And one of the things that we should do is just make a grid of the globe,and randomly go and inspect all the places that the grid intersects,,just to see what's on life. And if we did that,with our little Martian probe, which we have not done on Earth,,we would begin to see some incredible species. 
 This is not on another planet. These are things,that are hidden away on our planet.,This is an ant that stores its colleagues' honey in its abdomen.,Each one of these organisms that we've described -- that you've seen,from Jamie and others, these magnificent things --,what they're doing, each one of them,,is they're hacking the rules of life.,I can't think of a single general principle of biology,that does not have an exception somewhere by some organism.,Every single thing that we can think of --,and if you heard Olivia's talk about the sexual habits,,you'll realize that there isn't anything we can say that's true for all life,,because every single one of them is hacking something about it.,This is a solar-powered sea slug. It's a nudibranch,that has incorporated chloroplast inside it to drive its energy.,This is another version of that. This is a sea dragon,,and the one on the bottom, the blue one, is a juvenile that has not yet,swallowed the acid, has not yet taken in,the brown-green algae pond scum into its body to give it energy. 
 These are hacks, and if we looked at the general shape,of the approaches to hacking life there are, current consensus,,six kingdoms. Six different broad approaches: the plants,,the animals, the fungi, the protests -- the little things -- the bacteria,and the Archaea bacteria. The Archaeas.,Those are the general approaches to life. That's one way to look at life on Earth today. 
 But a more interesting way,,the current way to take the long view,,is to look at it in an evolutionary perspective.,And here we have a view of evolution where rather than having evolution,go over the linear time, we have it coming out from the center.,So in the center is the most primitive, and this is a genealogical chart,of all life on earth. This is all the same six kingdoms.,You see 4,000 representative species, and you can see where we are.,But what I like about this is it shows that,every living organism on Earth today is equally evolved.,Those fungi and bacteria are as highly evolved as humans.,They've been around just as long and gone through,just the same kind of trial and error to get here.,But we see that each one of these is actually hacking,,and has a different way of finding out how to do life. 
 And if we take the long-term trends of life, if we begin to say,,what does evolution want? There's several things that we see.,One of the things about evolution is that nowhere on Earth,have we ever been where we don't find life.,We find life at the bottom of every long-term,,long-distance drilling core into the center of rock,that we bring up -- and there's bacteria in the pores of that rock.,And wherever life is, it never retreats. It's ubiquitous and it wants to be more.,More and more of the inert matter of the globe,is being touched and animated by life. 
 The second thing is is we see diversity. We also see specialization.,We see the movement from a general-purpose cell,to the more specific and specialized.,And we see a drift towards complexity that's very intuitive.,And actually, we have current data that does show,that there is an actual drift towards complexity over time.,And the last thing, I bring back this nudibranch.,One of the things we see about life is that it moves,from the inner to increasing sociability. And by that it means,that there is more and more of life whose entire environment is other life.,Like those chloroplast cells --,they're completely surrounded by other life.,They never touch the inner matter. There is more and more co-evolution.,And so the general, long-term trends of evolution,are roughly these five: ubiquity, diversity, specialization,,complexity and socialization. Now, I took that and said,,OK, what are the long-term trends in technology? 
 And again, my question is, what does technology want?,And so, remarkably, I discovered,that there's also a drift toward specialization.,That we see there's a general hammer,,and hammers become more and more specific over time.,There's obviously diversity. Huge numbers of things.,This is all the contents of a Japanese home.,I actually had my daughter -- gave her a tally counter,,and I gave her an assignment last summer to go around,and count the number of species of technology in our household.,And it came up with 6,000 different species of products.,I did some research and found out that the King of England, Henry VIII,,had only about 7,000 items in his household.,And he was the King of England,,and that was the entire wealth of England at the time.,So we're seeing huge numbers of diversity in the kinds of things. 
 This is a scene from Star Wars where the 3PO comes out,and he sees machines making machines. How depraved!,Well, this is actually what we're headed towards: world machines.,And the technology is only being thrown out by other technologies.,Most machines will only ever be in contact with other technology,and not non-technology, or even life. 
 And thirdly, the idea that machines are becoming biological and complex,is at this point a cliche. And I'm happy to say,,I was partly responsible for that cliche,that machines are becoming biological, but that's pretty evident.,So the major trends in technology evolution actually,are the same as in biological evolution. The same drives that we see,towards ubiquity, towards diversity, towards socialization,,towards complexity. That is maybe not a big surprise,because if we map out, say, the evolution of armor,,you can actually follow a sort of an evolutionary-type cladistic tree.,I suggest that, in fact, technology is the seventh kingdom of life.,That its operations and how it works is so similar,that we can think of it as the seventh kingdom.,And so it would be sort of approximately up there,,coming out of the animal kingdom. And if we were to do that,,we would find out -- we could actually approach technology in this way. 
 This is Niles Eldredge. He was the co-developer with Stephen Jay Gould,of the theory of punctuated equilibrium.,But as a sideline, he happens to collect cornets.,He has one of the world's largest collections -- about 500 of them.,And he has decided to treat them as if they were trilobites, or snails,,and to do a morphological analysis,,and try to derive their genealogical history over time.,This is his chart, which is not quite published yet.,But the most interesting aspect about this,is that if you look at those red lines at the bottom,,those indicate basically a parentage of a type of cornet,that was no longer made. That does not happen in biology.,When something is extinct, you can't have it as your parent.,But that does happen in technology. And it turns out,that that's so distinctive that you can actually look at this tree,,and you can actually use it to determine,that this is a technological system versus a biological system. 
 In fact, this idea of resurrecting the whole idea is so important,that I began to think about what happens with old technology.,And it turns out that, in fact, technologies don't die.,So I suggested this to an historian of science, and he said,,"Well, what about, you know, come on, what about steam cars?,They're not around anymore." Well actually, they are.,In fact, they're so around that you can buy new parts for a Stanley steam automobile.,And this is a website of a guy who's selling brand new parts,for the Stanley automobile. And the thing that I liked,is sort of this one-click, add-to-your-cart button -- 
 (Laughter) -- 
 for buying steam valves. I mean, it was just -- it was really there.,And so, I began to think about, well, maybe that's just a random sample.,Maybe I should do this sort of in a more conservative way. 
 So I took the great big 1895 Montgomery Ward's catalog,and I randomly went through it. And I took a page -- not quite a random page --,I took a page that was actually more difficult than others,because lots of the pages are filled with things,that are still being made. But I took this page,and I said, how many of these things are still being made?,And not antiques. I want to know how many of these things are still in production.,And the answer is: all of them.,All of them are still being produced. So you've got corn shellers.,I don't know who needs a corn sheller.,Be it corn shellers -- you've got ploughs; you've got fan mills;,all these things -- and these are not, again, antiques. These are --,you can order these. You can go to the web and you can buy them now,,brand-new made. So in a certain sense, technologies don't die.,In fact, you can buy, for 50 bucks, a stone-age knife,made exactly the same way that they were made 10,000 years ago.,It's short, bone handle, 50 bucks. And in fact,,what's important is that this information actually never died out.,It's not just that it was resurrected. It's continued all along.,And in Papua New Guinea, they were making stone axes,until two decades ago, just as a course of practical matters. 
 Even when we try to get rid of a technology, it's actually very hard.,So we've all heard about the Amish giving up cars.,We've heard about the Japanese giving up guns.,We've heard about this and that. But I actually went back and,took what I could find, the examples in history,where there have been prohibitions against technology,,and then I tried to find out when they came back in,,because they always came back in. And it turns out that the time,,the duration of when they were outlawed and prohibited,,is decreasing over time. And that basically, you can delay technology,,but you can't kill it. So this makes sense, because in a certain sense,what culture is, is the accumulation of ideas.,That's what it's for. It's so that ideas don't die out.,And when we take that, we take this idea of what culture is doing,and add it to what the long-term trajectory -- again, in life's evolution --,we find that each case -- each of the major transitions in life --,what they're really about is accelerating and changing,the way in which evolution happens.,They're actually changing the way in which ideas are generated. 
 So all these steps in evolution are increasing, basically,,the evolution of evolvability.,So what's happening over time in life is,that the ways in which you generate these new ideas, these new hacks,,are increasing. And the real tricks are ways,in which you kind of explore the way of exploring.,And then what we see in the singularity,,that prophesized by Kurzweil and others --,his idea that technology is accelerating evolution.,It's accelerating the way in which we search for ideas.,So if you have life hacking --,life means hacking, the game of survival --,then evolution is a way to extend the game by changing the rules of the game.,And what technology is really about is better ways to evolve.,That is what we call an "infinite game.",That's the definition of "infinite game." A finite game is play to win,,and an infinite game is played to keep playing.,And I believe that technology is actually a cosmic force. 
 The origins of technology was not in 1829,,but was actually at the beginning of the Big Bang,,and at that moment the entire huge billions of stars in the universe,were compressed. The entire universe was compressed into a little quantum dot,,and it was so tight in there, there was no room for any difference at all.,That's the definition. There was no temperature.,There was no difference whatsoever. And at the Big Bang,,what it expanded was the potential for difference.,So as it expands and as things expand what we have,is the potential for differences, diversity, options, choices,,opportunities, possibilities and freedoms.,Those are all basically the same thing.,And those are the things that technology brings us.,That's what technology is bringing us: choices, possibilities, freedoms.,That's what it's about. It's this expansion of room to make differences.,And so a hammer, when we grab a hammer, that's what we're grabbing.,And that's why we continue to grab technology --,because we want those things. Those things are good.,Differences, freedom, choices, possibilities.,And each time we make a new opportunity place,,we're allowing a platform to make new ones. 
 And I think it's really important. Because if you can imagine,Mozart before the technology of the piano was invented --,what a loss to society there would be.,Imagine Van Gogh being born,before the technologies of cheap oil paints.,Imagine Hitchcock before the technologies of film.,Somewhere, today, there are millions of young children being born,whose technology of self-expression has not yet been invented.,We have a moral obligation to invent technology,so that every person on the globe has the potential,to realize their true difference.,We want a trillion zillion species of one individuals.,That's what technology really wants. 
 I'm going to skip through some of the objections,because I don't have answers to why there's deforestation.,I don't have an answer to the fact that there seem to be,bad technologies. I don't have an answer to,how this impacts on our dignity, other than to suggest that,maybe the seventh kingdom, because it's so close to what life is about,,maybe we can bring it back and have it help us monitor life.,Maybe in some ways,the fact that what we're trying to do with technology is find a good home for it.,It's a terrible thing to spray DDT on cotton fields,,but it's a really good thing to use,to eliminate millions of cases of death due to malaria in a small village. 
 Our humanity is actually defined by technology.,All the things that we think that we really like about humanity,is being driven by technology. This is the infinite game.,That's what we're talking about.,You see, technology is a way to evolve the evolution.,It's a way to explore possibilities and opportunities and create more.,And it's actually a way of playing the game, of playing all the games.,That's what technology wants.,And so when I think about what technology wants,,I think that it has to do with the fact that every person here -- and I really believe this --,every person here has an assignment. And your assignment is,to spend your life discovering what your assignment is.,That recursive nature is the infinite game.,And if you play that well, you'll have other people involved,,so even that game extends and continues even when you're gone.,That is the infinite game. And what technology is,is the medium in which we play that infinite game.,And so I think that we should embrace technology,because it is an essential part of our journey,in finding out who we are. 
 Thank you. 
 (Applause)Well, it's great to be here.,We've heard a lot about the promise of technology, and the peril.,I've been quite interested in both.,If we could convert 0.03 percent,of the sunlight that falls on the earth into energy,,we could meet all of our projected needs for 2030.,We can't do that today because solar panels are heavy,,expensive and very inefficient.,There are nano-engineered designs,,which at least have been analyzed theoretically,,that show the potential to be very lightweight,,very inexpensive, very efficient,,and we'd be able to actually provide all of our energy needs in this renewable way.,Nano-engineered fuel cells,could provide the energy where it's needed.,That's a key trend, which is decentralization,,moving from centralized nuclear power plants and,liquid natural gas tankers,to decentralized resources that are environmentally more friendly,,a lot more efficient,and capable and safe from disruption. 
 Bono spoke very eloquently,,that we have the tools, for the first time,,to address age-old problems of disease and poverty.,Most regions of the world are moving in that direction.,In 1990, in East Asia and the Pacific region,,there were 500 million people living in poverty --,that number now is under 200 million.,The World Bank projects by 2011, it will be under 20 million,,which is a reduction of 95 percent.,I did enjoy Bono's comment,linking Haight-Ashbury to Silicon Valley.,Being from the Massachusetts high-tech community myself,,I'd point out that we were hippies also in the 1960s,,although we hung around Harvard Square.,But we do have the potential to overcome disease and poverty,,and I'm going to talk about those issues, if we have the will. 
 Kevin Kelly talked about the acceleration of technology.,That's been a strong interest of mine,,and a theme that I've developed for some 30 years.,I realized that my technologies had to make sense when I finished a project.,That invariably, the world was a different place,when I would introduce a technology.,And, I noticed that most inventions fail,,not because the R&D department can't get it to work --,if you look at most business plans, they will actually succeed,if given the opportunity to build what they say they're going to build --,and 90 percent of those projects or more will fail, because the timing is wrong --,not all the enabling factors will be in place when they're needed. 
 So I began to be an ardent student of technology trends,,and track where technology would be at different points in time,,and began to build the mathematical models of that.,It's kind of taken on a life of its own.,I've got a group of 10 people that work with me to gather data,on key measures of technology in many different areas, and we build models.,And you'll hear people say, well, we can't predict the future.,And if you ask me,,will the price of Google be higher or lower than it is today three years from now,,that's very hard to say.,Will WiMax CDMA G3,be the wireless standard three years from now? That's hard to say.,But if you ask me, what will it cost,for one MIPS of computing in 2010,,or the cost to sequence a base pair of DNA in 2012,,or the cost of sending a megabyte of data wirelessly in 2014,,it turns out that those are very predictable. 
 There are remarkably smooth exponential curves,that govern price performance, capacity, bandwidth.,And I'm going to show you a small sample of this,,but there's really a theoretical reason,why technology develops in an exponential fashion.,And a lot of people, when they think about the future, think about it linearly.,They think they're going to continue,to develop a problem,or address a problem using today's tools,,at today's pace of progress,,and fail to take into consideration this exponential growth. 
 The Genome Project was a controversial project in 1990.,We had our best Ph.D. students,,our most advanced equipment around the world,,we got 1/10,000th of the project done,,so how're we going to get this done in 15 years?,And 10 years into the project,,the skeptics were still going strong -- says, "You're two-thirds through this project,,and you've managed to only sequence,a very tiny percentage of the whole genome.",But it's the nature of exponential growth,that once it reaches the knee of the curve, it explodes.,Most of the project was done in the last,few years of the project.,It took us 15 years to sequence HIV --,we sequenced SARS in 31 days.,So we are gaining the potential to overcome these problems. 
 I'm going to show you just a few examples,of how pervasive this phenomena is.,The actual paradigm-shift rate, the rate of adopting new ideas,,is doubling every decade, according to our models.,These are all logarithmic graphs,,so as you go up the levels it represents, generally multiplying by factor of 10 or 100.,It took us half a century to adopt the telephone,,the first virtual-reality technology.,Cell phones were adopted in about eight years.,If you put different communication technologies,on this logarithmic graph,,television, radio, telephone,were adopted in decades.,Recent technologies -- like the PC, the web, cell phones --,were under a decade.,Now this is an interesting chart,,and this really gets at the fundamental reason why,an evolutionary process -- and both biology and technology are evolutionary processes --,accelerate.,They work through interaction -- they create a capability,,and then it uses that capability to bring on the next stage. 
 So the first step in biological evolution,,the evolution of DNA -- actually it was RNA came first --,took billions of years,,but then evolution used that information-processing backbone,to bring on the next stage.,So the Cambrian Explosion, when all the body plans of the animals were evolved,,took only 10 million years. It was 200 times faster.,And then evolution used those body plans,to evolve higher cognitive functions,,and biological evolution kept accelerating.,It's an inherent nature of an evolutionary process.,So Homo sapiens, the first technology-creating species,,the species that combined a cognitive function,with an opposable appendage --,and by the way, chimpanzees don't really have a very good opposable thumb --,so we could actually manipulate our environment with a power grip,and fine motor coordination,,and use our mental models to actually change the world,and bring on technology. 
 But anyway, the evolution of our species took hundreds of thousands of years,,and then working through interaction,,evolution used, essentially,,the technology-creating species to bring on the next stage,,which were the first steps in technological evolution.,And the first step took tens of thousands of years --,stone tools, fire, the wheel -- kept accelerating.,We always used then the latest generation of technology,to create the next generation.,Printing press took a century to be adopted;,the first computers were designed pen-on-paper -- now we use computers.,And we've had a continual acceleration of this process. 
 Now by the way, if you look at this on a linear graph, it looks like everything has just happened,,but some observer says, "Well, Kurzweil just put points on this graph,that fall on that straight line.",So, I took 15 different lists from key thinkers,,like the Encyclopedia Britannica, the Museum of Natural History, Carl Sagan's Cosmic Calendar,on the same -- and these people were not trying to make my point;,these were just lists in reference works,,and I think that's what they thought the key events were,in biological evolution and technological evolution.,And again, it forms the same straight line. You have a little bit of thickening in the line,because people do have disagreements, what the key points are,,there's differences of opinion when agriculture started,,or how long the Cambrian Explosion took.,But you see a very clear trend.,There's a basic, profound acceleration of this evolutionary process.,Information technologies double their capacity, price performance, bandwidth,,every year.,And that's a very profound explosion of exponential growth.,A personal experience, when I was at MIT --,computer taking up about the size of this room,,less powerful than the computer in your cell phone.,But Moore's Law, which is very often identified with this exponential growth,,is just one example of many, because it's basically,a property of the evolutionary process of technology. 
 I put 49 famous computers on this logarithmic graph --,by the way, a straight line on a logarithmic graph is exponential growth --,that's another exponential.,It took us three years to double our price performance of computing in 1900,,two years in the middle; we're now doubling it every one year.,And that's exponential growth through five different paradigms.,Moore's Law was just the last part of that,,where we were shrinking transistors on an integrated circuit,,but we had electro-mechanical calculators,,relay-based computers that cracked the German Enigma Code,,vacuum tubes in the 1950s predicted the election of Eisenhower,,discreet transistors used in the first space flights,and then Moore's Law.,Every time one paradigm ran out of steam,,another paradigm came out of left field to continue the exponential growth.,They were shrinking vacuum tubes, making them smaller and smaller.,That hit a wall. They couldn't shrink them and keep the vacuum.,Whole different paradigm -- transistors came out of the woodwork.,In fact, when we see the end of the line for a particular paradigm,,it creates research pressure to create the next paradigm.,And because we've been predicting the end of Moore's Law,for quite a long time -- the first prediction said 2002, until now it says 2022.,But by the teen years,,the features of transistors will be a few atoms in width,,and we won't be able to shrink them any more.,That'll be the end of Moore's Law, but it won't be the end of,the exponential growth of computing, because chips are flat.,We live in a three-dimensional world; we might as well use the third dimension.,We will go into the third dimension,and there's been tremendous progress, just in the last few years,,of getting three-dimensional, self-organizing molecular circuits to work.,We'll have those ready well before Moore's Law runs out of steam.,Supercomputers -- same thing.,Processor performance on Intel chips,,the average price of a transistor --,1968, you could buy one transistor for a dollar.,You could buy 10 million in 2002. 
 It's pretty remarkable how smooth,an exponential process that is.,I mean, you'd think this is the result of some tabletop experiment,,but this is the result of worldwide chaotic behavior --,countries accusing each other of dumping products,,IPOs, bankruptcies, marketing programs.,You would think it would be a very erratic process,,and you have a very smooth,outcome of this chaotic process.,Just as we can't predict,what one molecule in a gas will do --,it's hopeless to predict a single molecule --,yet we can predict the properties of the whole gas,,using thermodynamics, very accurately.,It's the same thing here. We can't predict any particular project,,but the result of this whole worldwide,,chaotic, unpredictable activity of competition,and the evolutionary process of technology is very predictable.,And we can predict these trends far into the future.,Unlike Gertrude Stein's roses,,it's not the case that a transistor is a transistor.,As we make them smaller and less expensive,,the electrons have less distance to travel.,They're faster, so you've got exponential growth in the speed of transistors,,so the cost of a cycle of one transistor,has been coming down with a halving rate of 1.1 years.,You add other forms of innovation and processor design,,you get a doubling of price performance of computing every one year. 
 And that's basically deflation --,50 percent deflation.,And it's not just computers. I mean, it's true of DNA sequencing;,it's true of brain scanning;,it's true of the World Wide Web. I mean, anything that we can quantify,,we have hundreds of different measurements,of different, information-related measurements --,capacity, adoption rates --,and they basically double every 12, 13, 15 months,,depending on what you're looking at.,In terms of price performance, that's a 40 to 50 percent deflation rate.,And economists have actually started worrying about that.,We had deflation during the Depression,,but that was collapse of the money supply,,collapse of consumer confidence, a completely different phenomena.,This is due to greater productivity,,but the economist says, "But there's no way you're going to be able to keep up with that.,If you have 50 percent deflation, people may increase their volume,30, 40 percent, but they won't keep up with it.",But what we're actually seeing is that,we actually more than keep up with it.,We've had 28 percent per year compounded growth in dollars,in information technology over the last 50 years.,I mean, people didn't build iPods for 10,000 dollars 10 years ago.,As the price performance makes new applications feasible,,new applications come to the market.,And this is a very widespread phenomena.,Magnetic data storage --,that's not Moore's Law, it's shrinking magnetic spots,,different engineers, different companies, same exponential process. 
 A key revolution is that we're understanding our own biology,in these information terms.,We're understanding the software programs,that make our body run.,These were evolved in very different times --,we'd like to actually change those programs.,One little software program, called the fat insulin receptor gene,,basically says, "Hold onto every calorie,,because the next hunting season may not work out so well.",That was in the interests of the species tens of thousands of years ago.,We'd like to actually turn that program off.,They tried that in animals, and these mice ate ravenously,and remained slim and got the health benefits of being slim.,They didn't get diabetes; they didn't get heart disease;,they lived 20 percent longer; they got the health benefits of caloric restriction,without the restriction.,Four or five pharmaceutical companies have noticed this,,felt that would be,interesting drug for the human market,,and that's just one of the 30,000 genes,that affect our biochemistry. 
 We were evolved in an era where it wasn't in the interests of people,at the age of most people at this conference, like myself,,to live much longer, because we were using up the precious resources,which were better deployed towards the children,and those caring for them.,So, life -- long lifespans --,like, that is to say, much more than 30 --,weren't selected for,,but we are learning to actually manipulate,and change these software programs,through the biotechnology revolution.,For example, we can inhibit genes now with RNA interference.,There are exciting new forms of gene therapy,that overcome the problem of placing the genetic material,in the right place on the chromosome.,There's actually a -- for the first time now,,something going to human trials, that actually cures pulmonary hypertension --,a fatal disease -- using gene therapy.,So we'll have not just designer babies, but designer baby boomers.,And this technology is also accelerating.,It cost 10 dollars per base pair in 1990,,then a penny in 2000.,It's now under a 10th of a cent.,The amount of genetic data --,basically this shows that smooth exponential growth,doubled every year,,enabling the genome project to be completed. 
 Another major revolution: the communications revolution.,The price performance, bandwidth, capacity of communications measured many different ways;,wired, wireless is growing exponentially.,The Internet has been doubling in power and continues to,,measured many different ways.,This is based on the number of hosts. 
 Miniaturization -- we're shrinking the size of technology,at an exponential rate,,both wired and wireless.,These are some designs from Eric Drexler's book --,which we're now showing are feasible,with super-computing simulations,,where actually there are scientists building,molecule-scale robots.,One has one that actually walks with a surprisingly human-like gait,,that's built out of molecules.,There are little machines doing things in experimental bases.,The most exciting opportunity,is actually to go inside the human body,and perform therapeutic and diagnostic functions.,And this is less futuristic than it may sound.,These things have already been done in animals. 
 There's one nano-engineered device that cures type 1 diabetes. It's blood cell-sized.,They put tens of thousands of these,in the blood cell -- they tried this in rats --,it lets insulin out in a controlled fashion,,and actually cures type 1 diabetes.,What you're watching is a design,of a robotic red blood cell,,and it does bring up the issue that our biology,is actually very sub-optimal,,even though it's remarkable in its intricacy.,Once we understand its principles of operation,,and the pace with which we are reverse-engineering biology is accelerating,,we can actually design these things to be,thousands of times more capable.,An analysis of this respirocyte, designed by Rob Freitas,,indicates if you replace 10 percent of your red blood cells with these robotic versions,,you could do an Olympic sprint for 15 minutes without taking a breath.,You could sit at the bottom of your pool for four hours --,so, "Honey, I'm in the pool," will take on a whole new meaning.,It will be interesting to see what we do in our Olympic trials.,Presumably we'll ban them,,but then we'll have the specter of teenagers in their high schools gyms,routinely out-performing the Olympic athletes.,Freitas has a design for a robotic white blood cell.,These are 2020-circa scenarios,,but they're not as futuristic as it may sound.,There are four major conferences on building blood cell-sized devices;,there are many experiments in animals.,There's actually one going into human trial,,so this is feasible technology. 
 If we come back to our exponential growth of computing,,1,000 dollars of computing is now somewhere between an insect and a mouse brain.,It will intersect human intelligence,in terms of capacity in the 2020s,,but that'll be the hardware side of the equation.,Where will we get the software?,Well, it turns out we can see inside the human brain,,and in fact not surprisingly,,the spatial and temporal resolution of brain scanning is doubling every year.,And with the new generation of scanning tools,,for the first time we can actually see,individual inter-neural fibers,and see them processing and signaling in real time --,but then the question is, OK, we can get this data now,,but can we understand it?,Doug Hofstadter wonders, well, maybe our intelligence,just isn't great enough to understand our intelligence,,and if we were smarter, well, then our brains would be that much more complicated,,and we'd never catch up to it.,It turns out that we can understand it. 
 This is a block diagram of,a model and simulation of the human auditory cortex,that actually works quite well --,in applying psychoacoustic tests, gets very similar results to human auditory perception.,There's another simulation of the cerebellum --,that's more than half the neurons in the brain --,again, works very similarly to human skill formation.,This is at an early stage, but you can show,with the exponential growth of the amount of information about the brain,and the exponential improvement,in the resolution of brain scanning,,we will succeed in reverse-engineering the human brain,by the 2020s.,We've already had very good models and simulation of about 15 regions,out of the several hundred. 
 All of this is driving,exponentially growing economic progress.,We've had productivity go from 30 dollars to 150 dollars per hour,of labor in the last 50 years.,E-commerce has been growing exponentially. It's now a trillion dollars.,You might wonder, well, wasn't there a boom and a bust?,That was strictly a capital-markets phenomena.,Wall Street noticed that this was a revolutionary technology, which it was,,but then six months later, when it hadn't revolutionized all business models,,they figured, well, that was wrong,,and then we had this bust. 
 All right, this is a technology,that we put together using some of the technologies we're involved in.,This will be a routine feature in a cell phone.,It would be able to translate from one language to another. 
 So let me just end with a couple of scenarios.,By 2010 computers will disappear.,They'll be so small, they'll be embedded in our clothing, in our environment.,Images will be written directly to our retina,,providing full-immersion virtual reality,,augmented real reality. We'll be interacting with virtual personalities. 
 But if we go to 2029, we really have the full maturity of these trends,,and you have to appreciate how many turns of the screw,in terms of generations of technology, which are getting faster and faster, we'll have at that point.,I mean, we will have two-to-the-25th-power,greater price performance, capacity and bandwidth,of these technologies, which is pretty phenomenal.,It'll be millions of times more powerful than it is today.,We'll have completed the reverse-engineering of the human brain,,1,000 dollars of computing will be far more powerful,than the human brain in terms of basic raw capacity.,Computers will combine,the subtle pan-recognition powers,of human intelligence with ways in which machines are already superior,,in terms of doing analytic thinking,,remembering billions of facts accurately.,Machines can share their knowledge very quickly.,But it's not just an alien invasion of intelligent machines.,We are going to merge with our technology. 
 These nano-bots I mentioned,will first be used for medical and health applications:,cleaning up the environment, providing powerful fuel cells,and widely distributed decentralized solar panels and so on in the environment.,But they'll also go inside our brain,,interact with our biological neurons.,We've demonstrated the key principles of being able to do this.,So, for example,,full-immersion virtual reality from within the nervous system,,the nano-bots shut down the signals coming from your real senses,,replace them with the signals that your brain would be receiving,if you were in the virtual environment,,and then it'll feel like you're in that virtual environment.,You can go there with other people, have any kind of experience,with anyone involving all of the senses.,"Experience beamers," I call them, will put their whole flow of sensory experiences,in the neurological correlates of their emotions out on the Internet.,You can plug in and experience what it's like to be someone else.,But most importantly,,it'll be a tremendous expansion,of human intelligence through this direct merger with our technology,,which in some sense we're doing already.,We routinely do intellectual feats,that would be impossible without our technology.,Human life expectancy is expanding. It was 37 in 1800,,and with this sort of biotechnology, nano-technology revolutions,,this will move up very rapidly,in the years ahead. 
 My main message is that progress in technology,is exponential, not linear.,Many -- even scientists -- assume a linear model,,so they'll say, "Oh, it'll be hundreds of years,before we have self-replicating nano-technology assembly,or artificial intelligence.",If you really look at the power of exponential growth,,you'll see that these things are pretty soon at hand.,And information technology is increasingly encompassing,all of our lives, from our music to our manufacturing,to our biology to our energy to materials. 
 We'll be able to manufacture almost anything we need in the 2020s,,from information, in very inexpensive raw materials,,using nano-technology.,These are very powerful technologies.,They both empower our promise and our peril.,So we have to have the will to apply them to the right problems. 
 Thank you very much. 
 (Applause)I'm going to discuss with you three of my inventions,that can have an effect on 10 to a 100 million people,,which we will hope to see happen.,We discussed, in the prior film, some of the old things that we did,,like stents and insulin pumps for the diabetic.,And I'd like to talk very briefly about three new inventions,that will change the lives of many people. 
 At the present time, it takes an average of three hours,after the first symptoms of a heart attack are recognized by the patient,,before that patient arrives at an emergency room.,And people with silent ischemia --,which, translated into English, means they don't have any symptoms --,it takes even longer for them to get to the hospital.,The AMI, Acute Myocardial Infarction,,which is a doctor's big word so they can charge you more money --,(Laughter),-- means a heart attack. Annual incidence: 1.2 million Americans.,Mortality: 300,000 people dying each year.,About half of them, 600,000, have permanent damage to their heart,that will cause them to have very bad problems later on.,Thus 900,000 people either have died,or have significant damage to their heart muscle.,Symptoms are often denied by the patient, particularly us men,,because we are very brave. We are very brave,,and we don't want to admit that I'm having a hell of a chest pain.,Then, approximately 25 percent of all patients never have any symptoms.,What are we going to do about them? How can we save their lives?,It's particularly true of diabetics and elderly women. 
 Well, what is needed for the earliest possible warning of a heart attack?,A means to determine if there's a complete blockage of a coronary artery.,That, ladies and gentlemen, is a heart attack.,The means consist of noting something a little technical,,ST segment elevation of the electrogram --,translated into English, that means that,if there's an electrical signal in the heart, and one part of the ECG --,which we call the ST segment -- elevates,,that is a sure sign of a heart attack.,And if we had a computer put into the body of a person who's at risk,,we could know, before they even have symptoms,,that they're having a heart attack, to save their life.,Well, the doctor can program a level of this ST elevation voltage,that will trigger an emergency alarm,,vibration like your cell phone, but right by your clavicle bone.,And when it goes beep, beep, beep, you better do something about it,,because if you want to live you have to get to some medical treatment. 
 So we have to try these devices out,because the FDA won't just let us use them on people,unless we try it out first,,and the best model for this happens to be pigs.,And what we tried with the pig was external electrodes on the skin,,like you see in an emergency room,,and I'm going to show you why they don't work very well.,And then we put a lead, which is a wire, in the right ventricle inside the heart,,which does the electrogram, which is the signal voltage from inside the heart.,Well, with the pig, at the baseline,,before we blocked the pig's artery to simulate a heart attack, that was the signal.,After 43 seconds, even an expert couldn't tell the difference,,and after three minutes -- well,,if you really studied it, you'd see a difference.,But what happened when we looked inside the pig's heart, to the electrogram? 
 There was the baseline -- first of all, a much bigger and more reliable signal.,Second of all, I'll bet even you people who are untrained can see the difference,,and we see here an ST segment elevation right after this sharp line.,Look at the difference there. It doesn't take much --,every layperson could see that difference,,and computers can be programmed to easily detect it.,Then, look at that after three minutes.,We see that the signal that's actually in the heart,,we can use it to tell people that they're having a heart attack,even before they have symptoms so we can save their life. 
 Then we tried it with my son, Dr. Tim Fischell,,we tried it on some human patients who had to have a stent put in.,Well, he kept the balloon filled to block the artery,,to simulate a blockage, which is what a heart attack is.,And it's not hard to see that -- the baseline,is the first picture on the upper left.,Next to it, at 30 seconds, you see this rise here,,then this rise -- that's the ST elevation.,And if we had a computer that could detect it,,we could tell you you're having a heart attack so early,it could save your life and prevent congestive heart failure.,And then he did it again. We filled the balloon again a few minutes later,and here you see, even after 10 seconds, a great rise in this piece,,which we can have computers inside, under your chest like a pacemaker,,with a wire into your heart like a pacemaker.,And computers don't go to sleep.,We have a little battery and on this little battery,that computer will run for five years without needing replacement. 
 What does the system look like?,Well, on the left is the IMD, which is Implantable Medical Device,,and tonight in the tent you can see it -- they've exhibited it.,It's about this big, the size of a pacemaker.,It's implanted with very conventional techniques.,And the EXD is an External Device that you can have on your night table.,It'll wake you up and tell you to get your tail to the emergency room,when the thing goes off because, if you don't, you're in deep doo-doo.,And then, finally, a programmer that will set the level of the stimulation,,which is the level which says you are having a heart attack. 
 The FDA says, OK, test this final device after it's built in some animal,,which we said is a pig, so we had to get this pig to have a heart attack.,And when you go to the farmyard, you can't easily get pigs to have heart attacks,,so we said, well, we're experts in stents.,Tonight you'll see some of our invented stents.,We said, so we'll put in a stent,,but we're not going to put in a stent that we'd put in people.,We're putting in a copper stent,,and this copper stent erodes the artery and causes heart attacks.,That's not very nice, but, after all, we had to find out what the answer is.,So we took two copper stents and we put it in the artery of this pig,,and let me show you the result that's very gratifying,as far as people who have heart disease are concerned. 
 So there it was, Thursday morning we stopped the pig's medication,and there is his electrogram, the signal from inside the pig's heart,coming out by radio telemetry.,Then, on Friday at 6:43, he began to get certain signs,,which later we had the pig run around --,I'm not going to go into this early stage.,But look what happened at 10:06 after we removed this pig's medication,that kept him from having a heart attack.,Any one of you now is an expert on ST elevation. Can you see it there?,Can you see it in the picture after the big rise of the QRS -- you see ST elevation?,This pig at 10:06 was having a heart attack.,What happens after you have the heart attack, this blockage?,Your rhythm becomes irregular, and that's what happened 45 minutes later.,Then, ventricular fibrillation, the heart quivers instead of beats --,this is just before death of the pig -- and then the pig died; it went flat-line.,But we had a little bit over an hour where we could've saved this pig's life.,Well, because of the FDA, we didn't save the pig's life,,because we need to do this type of animal research for humans.,But when it comes to the sake of a human, we can save their life.,We can save the lives of people who are at high risk for a heart attack. 
 What is the response to acute myocardial infarction, a heart attack, today?,Well, you feel some chest pain or indigestion.,It's not all that bad; you decide not to do anything.,Several hours pass and it gets worse, and even the man won't ignore it.,Finally, you go to the emergency room.,You wait as burns and other critical patients are treated,,because 75 percent of the patients who go to an emergency room with chest pains,don't have AMI, so you're not taken very seriously.,They finally see you. It takes more time,to get your electrocardiogram on your skin and diagnose it,,and it's hard to do because they don't have the baseline data,,which the computer we put in you gets.,Finally, if you're lucky, you are treated in three or four hours after the incident,,but the heart muscle has died.,And that is the typical treatment in the advanced world -- not Africa --,that's the typical treatment in the advanced world today. 
 So we developed the AngelMed Guardian System,and we have a device inside this patient, called the Implanted AngelMed Guardian.,And when you have a blockage, the alarm goes off,and it sends the alarm and the electrogram to an external device,,which gets your baseline electrogram from 24 hours ago,and the one that caused the alarm, so you can take it to the emergency room,and show them, and say, take care of me right away.,Then it goes to a network operations center,,where they get your data from your patient database,that's been put in at some central location, say, in the United States.,Then it goes to a diagnostic center, and within one minute of your heart attack,,your signal appears on the screen of a computer,and the computer analyzes what your problem is.,And the person who's there, the medical practitioner, calls you --,this is also a cell phone -- and says,,"Mr. Smith, you're in deep doo-doo; you have a problem.,We've called the ambulance. The ambulance is on the way.,It'll pick you up, and then we're going to call your doctor, tell him about it.,We're going to send him the signal that we have, that says you have a heart attack,,and we're going to send the signal to the hospital,and we're going to have it analyzed there,,and there you're going to be with your doctor,and you'll be taken care of so you won't die of a heart attack.",That's the first invention that I wanted to describe.,(Applause) 
 And now I want to talk about something entirely different.,At first I didn't think migraine headaches were a big problem,because I'd never had a migraine headache,,but then I spoke to some people who have three or four every week of their life,,and their lives are being totally ruined by it.,We have a mission statement for our company doing migraine, which is,,"Prevent or ameliorate migraine headaches,by the application of a safe, controlled magnetic pulse,applied, as needed, by the patient.",Now, you're probably very few physicists here.,If you're a physicist you'd know there's a certain Faraday's Law,,which says if I apply a magnetic pulse on salt water --,that's your brains by the way --,it'll generate electric currents, and the electric current in the brain,can erase a migraine headache.,That's what we have discovered. 
 So here's a picture of what we're doing.,The patients who have a migraine preceded by an aura,have a band of excited neurons -- that's shown in red --,that moves at three to five millimeters a minute towards the mid-brain.,And when it hits the mid-brain, that's when the headache begins.,There's this migraine that is preceded by a visual aura,,and this visual aura, by the way -- and I'll show you a picture --,but it sort of begins with little dancing lights,,gets bigger and bigger until it fills your whole visual field.,And what we tried was this; here is a device called the Cadwell Model MES10.,Weighs about 70 pounds, has a wire about an inch in diameter.,And here's one of the patients who has an aura,and always has a headache, bad one, after the aura. What do we do? 
 This is what an aura looks like.,It's sort of funny dancing lights, shown there on the left and right side.,And that's a fully developed visual aura, as we see on top.,In the middle, our experimentalist, the neurologist, who said,,"I'm going to move this down a little and I'm going to erase half your aura.",And, by God, the neurologist did erase it, and that's the middle picture:,half of the aura erased by a short magnetic pulse.,What does that mean?,That means that the magnetic pulse is generating an electric current,that's interfering with the erroneous electrical activity in the brain.,And finally he says, "OK, now I'm going to -- ",all of the aura get erased with an appropriately placed magnetic pulse. 
 What is the result? We designed a magnetic depolarizer,that looks like this, that you could have -- a lady, in her pocket book --,and when you get an aura you can try it and see how it works.,Well, the next thing they have to show is what was on ABC News,,Channel 7, last week in New York City, in the 11 o'clock news. 
 Anchor: For anyone who suffers from migraine headaches --,and there are 30 million Americans who do -- tonight: a possible answer.,Eyewitness news reporter Stacy Sager tonight, with a small and portable machine,that literally zaps your migraines away.,Christina Sidebottom: Well, my first reaction was that it was --,looked awfully gun-like, and it was very strange.,Stacy Sager: But for Christina Sidebottom, almost anything was worth trying,if it could stop a migraine.,It may look silly or even frightening as you walk around with it in your purse,,but researchers here in Ohio organizing clinical trials for this migraine zapper,,say it is scientifically sound --,that, in fact, when the average person gets a migraine,,it's caused by something similar to an electrical impulse.,The zapper creates a magnetic field to counteract that.,Yousef Mohammed: In other words, we're treating electricity with electricity,,rather than treating electricity with the chemicals that we're using nowadays.,SS: But is it safe to use everyday?,Experts say the research has actually been around for more than a decade,,and more long-term studies need to be done. Christina now swears by it.,CS: It's been the most wonderful thing for my migraine.,SS: Researchers are hoping to present their studies to the FDA this summer. 
 Robert Fischell: And that is the invention to treat migraines.,(Applause),You see, the problem is, 30 million Americans have migraine headaches,,and we need a means to treat it, and I think that we now have it.,And this is the first device that we did, and I'm going to talk about my second wish,,which has something to do with this.,Our conclusions from our studies so far, at three research centers,,is there is a marked improvement in pain levels after using it just once.,The most severe headaches responded better after we did it several times,,and the unexpected finding indicates that even established headaches,,not only those with aura, get treated and get diminished.,And auras can be erased and the migraine, then, does not occur.,And that is the migraine invention that we are talking about and that we are working on.,(Applause) 
 The third and last invention began with an idea.,Epilepsy can best be treated by responsive electrical stimulation.,Now, why do we use -- add on, nearly, an epileptic focus?,Now, unfortunately, us technical people, unlike Mr. Bono,,have to get into all these technical words.,Well, "responsive electrical stimulation" means,that we sense, at a place in your brain which is called an "epileptic focus,",which is where the epileptic seizure begins --,we sense there, that it's going to happen,,and then we respond by applying an electrical energy at that spot,,which erases the errant signal,so that you don't get the clinical manifestations of the migraine headache.,We use current pacemaker defibrillator technology that's used for the heart.,We thought we could adapt it for the brain.,The device could be implanted under the scalp,to be totally hidden and avoid wire breakage,,which occurs if you put it in the chest and you try to move your neck around.,Form a company to develop a neuro-pacemaker for epilepsy,,as well as other diseases of the brain, because all diseases of the brain,are a result of some electrical malfunction in it,,that causes many, if not all, of brain disorders. 
 We formed a company called NeuroPace,and we started work on responsive neurostimulation,,and this is a picture of what the device looked like,,that's placed into the cranial bone.,This is probably a better picture.,Here we have our device in which we put in a frame.,There's a cut made in the scalp; it's opened; the neurosurgeon has a template;,he marks it around, and uses a dental burr,to remove a piece of the cranial bone exactly the size of our device.,And tonight, you'll be able to see the device in the tent.,And then with four screws, we put in a frame,,then we snap in the device and we run with wires --,the one shown in green will go to the surface of the brain with electrodes,,to the epileptic focus, the origin of the epilepsy,,where we can sense the electrical signal,and have computer analysis that tells us when to hit it with some electrical current,to prevent the clinical manifestation of the seizure.,In the blue wire, we see what's called a deep brain electrode.,If that's the source of the epilepsy, we can attack that as well. 
 The comprehensive solution: this is the device;,it's about one inches by two inches and, oddly enough,,just the thickness of most cranial bones.,The advantages of responsive neurostimulation:,It can detect and terminate seizures before the clinical symptoms occur,,provide stimulation only when needed,,can be turned off if seizures disappear; it has minimal side effects --,as a matter of fact, in all our clinical trials to date,,we've seen no side effects in the 40 or so patients in whom it's been implanted --,and it's invisible, cosmetically hidden,,so, if you have epilepsy and you have the device,,no one will know it because you can't tell that it's there.,And this shows what an electroencephalogram is,,and on the left is the signal of a spontaneous seizure of one of the patients.,Then we stimulated, and you see how that heavy black line,and then you see the electroencephalogram signal going to normal,,which means they did not get the epileptic seizure.,That concludes my discussion of epilepsy,,which is the third invention that I want to discuss here this afternoon.,(Applause) 
 I have three wishes. Well, I can't do much about Africa.,I'm a tech; I'm into medical gadgetry,,which is mostly high-tech stuff like Mr. Bono talked about.,The first wish is to use the epilepsy responsive neurostimulator,,called RNS, for Responsive NeuroStimulator -- that's a brilliant acronym --,for the treatment of other brain disorders.,Well, if we're going to do it for epilepsy, why the hell not try it for something else?,Then you saw what that device looked like,,that the woman was using to fix her migraines?,I tell you this: that's something which some research engineer like me would concoct,,not a real designer of good equipment.,(Laughter),We want to have some people, who really know how to do this,,perform human engineering studies to develop the optimum design,for the portable device for treating migraine headaches.,And some of the sponsors of this TED meeting are such organizations.,Then we're going to challenge the TED attendees,to come up with a way to improve health care in the USA,,where we have problems that Africa doesn't have.,And by reducing malpractice litigation --,malpractice litigation is not an African problem; it's an American problem.,(Applause) 
 So, to get quickly to my first wish --,the brain operates by electrical signals.,If the electrical signals create a brain disorder,,electro-stimulation can overcome that disorder by acting on the brain's neurons.,In other words, if you've screwed up electrical signals,,maybe, by putting other electrical signals from a computer in the brain,,we can counteract that.,A signal in the brain that triggers brain dysfunction,might be sensed as a trigger for electro-stimulation,like we're doing with epilepsy.,But even if there is no signal,,electro-stimulation of an appropriate part of the brain can turn off a brain disorder.,And consider treating psychotic disorders --,and I want this involved with the TED group --,such as obsessive-compulsive disorder,that, presently, is not well treated with drugs, and includes five million Americans.,And Mr. Fischer, and his group at NeuroPace, and myself believe,that we can have a dramatic effect in improving OCD in America and in the world.,That is the first wish.,(Applause) 
 The second wish is, at the present time,,the clinical trials of transcranial magnetic stimulators --,that's what TMS means, device to treat migraine headaches --,appears to be quite successful.,Well, that's the good news.,The present portable device is far from optimally designed,,both as to human factors as appearance.,I think she said it looks like a gun. A lot of people don't like guns.,(Laughter),Engage a company having prior successes,for human factors engineering and industrial design,to optimize the design of the first portable TMS device,that will be sold to the patients who have migraine headaches.,And that is the second wish.,(Applause) 
 And, of the 100,000-dollar prize money, that TED was so generous to give me,,I am donating 50,000 dollars to the NeuroPace people,to get on with the treatment of OCD, obsessive-compulsive disorder,,and I'm making another 50,000 available for a company,to optimize the design of the device for migraines.,And that's how I'll use my 100,000-dollar prize money.,(Applause) 
 Well, the third and final wish is somewhat --,unfortunately, it's much more complicated because it involves lawyers.,(Laughter),Well, medical malpractice litigation in the US,has escalated the cost of malpractice insurance,,so that competent physicians are leaving their practice.,Lawyers take cases on contingency with the hope of a big share,of a big settlement by a sympathetic jury, because this patient really ended up badly.,The high cost of health care in the US is partly due to litigation and insurance costs.,I've seen pictures, graphs in today's USA Today,showing it skyrocketing out of control, and this is one factor.,Well, how can the TED community help with this situation? 
 I have a couple of ideas to begin with.,As a starting point for discussion with the TED group,,a major part of the problem is the nature of the written extent,of informed consent that the patient or spouse must read and sign.,For example, I asked the epilepsy people,what are they using for informed consent.,Would you believe, 12 pages, single space,,the patient has to read before they're in our trial to cure their epilepsy?,What do you think someone has at the end of reading 12 single-spaced pages?,They don't understand what the hell it's about.,(Laughter),That's the present system. How about making a video?,We have entertainment people here;,we have people who know how to do videos,,with visual presentation of the anatomy and procedure done with animation.,Everybody knows that we can do better with a visual thing,that can be interactive with the patient, where they see the video,and they're being videoed and they press, do you understand this? No, I don't.,Well, then let's go to a simpler explanation.,Then there's a simpler one and, oh yes, I understand that.,Well, press the button and you're on record, you understand.,And that is one of the ideas. 
 Now, also a video is done of the patient or spouse and medical presenter,,with the patient agreeing that he understands the procedure to be done,,including all the possible failure modes.,The patient or spouse agrees not to file a lawsuit,if one of the known procedure failures occurs.,Now, in America, in fact, you cannot give up your right to trial by jury.,However, if a video is there that everything was explained to you,,and you have it all in the video file,,it'll be much less likely that some hotshot lawyer,will take this case on contingency, because it won't be nearly as good a case.,If a medical error occurs, the patient or spouse agrees to a settlement,for fair compensation by arbitration instead of going to court.,That would save hundreds of millions of dollars in legal costs in the United States,and would decrease the cost of medicine for everyone. 
 These are just some starting points.,And, so there, that's the end of all my wishes.,I wish I had more wishes but three is what I've got and there they are.,(Applause)So my grandfather told me when I was a little girl,,"If you say a word often enough, it becomes you.",And having grown up in a segregated city, Baltimore, Maryland,,I sort of use that idea to go around America with a tape recorder --,thank God for technology --,to interview people, thinking that if I walked in their words --,which is also why I don't wear shoes when I perform --,if I walked in their words, that I could sort of absorb America.,I was also inspired by Walt Whitman,,who wanted to absorb America and have it absorb him. 
 So these four characters are going to be from that work,that I've been doing for many years now,,and well over, I don't know, a couple of thousand people,I've interviewed.,Anybody out here old enough to know Studs Terkel, that old radio man?,So I thought he would be the perfect person,to go to to ask about a defining moment in American history.,You know, he was "born in 1912, the year the Titanic sank,,greatest ship every built. Hits the tip of an iceberg,,and bam, it went down. It went down and I came up. Wow, some century.",(Laughter) 
 So this is his answer about a defining moment in American history.,"Defining moment in American history, I don't think there's one;,you can't say Hiroshima, that's a big one --,I can't think of any one moment I would say is a defining moment.,The gradual slippage -- 'slippage' is the word,used by the people in Watergate, moral slippage --,it's a gradual kind of thing, combination of things.,You see, we also have the technology.,I say, less and less the human touch. 
 "Oh, let me kind of tell you a funny little play bit.,The Atlanta airport is a modern airport,,and they should leave the gate there.,These trains that take you out to a concourse and on to a destination.,And these trains are smooth,,and they're quiet and they're efficient.,And there's a voice on the train, you know the voice was a human voice.,You see in the old days we had robots, robots imitated humans.,Now we have humans imitating robots.,So we got this voice on this train: Concourse One: Omaha, Lincoln.,Concourse Two: Dallas, Fort Worth. Same voice.,Just as a train is about to go, a young couple rush in,and they're just about to close the pneumatic doors.,And that voice, without losing a beat, says,,'Because of late entry, we're delayed 30 seconds.',Just then, everybody's looking at this couple with hateful eyes,and the couple's going like this, you know, shrinking.,Well, I'd happened to have had a couple of drinks before boarding --,I do that to steel my nerves -- and so,I imitate a train call, holding my hand on my --,'George Orwell, your time has come,' you see.,Well, some of you are laughing. Everybody laughs,when I say that, but not on this train. Silence.,And so suddenly they're looking at me.,So here I am with the couple, the three of us,shrinking at the foot of Calvary about to be up, you know. 
 "Just then I see a baby, a little baby in the lap of a mother.,I know it's Hispanic because she's speaking Spanish to her companion.,So I'm going to talk to the baby. So I say to the baby,,holding my hand over my mouth because my breath must be 100 proof,,I say to the baby, 'Sir or Madam,,what is your considered opinion of the human species?',And the baby looks, you know, the way babies look at you clearly,,starts laughing,,starts busting out with this crazy little laugh.,I say, 'Thank God for a human reaction, we haven't lost yet.' 
 "But you see, the human touch, you see, it's disappearing.,You know, you see, you've got to question the official truth.,You know the thing that was so great about Mark Twain --,you know we honor Mark Twain, but we don't read him.,We read 'Huck Finn,' of course, we read 'Huck Finn' of course.,I mean, Huck, of course, was tremendous.,Remember that great scene on the raft, remember what Huck did?,You see, here's Huck; he's an illiterate kid; he's had no schooling,,but there's something in him.,And the official truth, the truth was, the law was,,that a black man was a property, was a thing, you see. 
 And Huck gets on the raft with a property named Jim, a slave, see.,And he hears that Jim is going to go and take his wife and kids,and steal them from the woman who owns them,,and Huck says, 'Ooh, oh my God, ooh, ooh --,that woman, that woman never did anybody any harm.,Ooh, he's going to steal; he's going to steal;,he's going to do a terrible thing.',Just then, two slavers caught up, guys chasing slaves, looking for Jim.,'Anybody up on that raft with you?' Huck says, 'Yeah.','Is he black or white?' 'White.' And they go off.,And Huck said, 'Oh my God, oh my God, I lied, I lied, ooh,,I did a terrible thing, did a terrible thing -- why do I feel so good?' 
 "But it's the goodness of Huck, that stuff that Huck's been made of,,you see, all been buried; it's all been buried.,So the human touch, you see, it's disappearing.,So you ask about a defining moment --,ain't no defining moment in American history for me.,It's an accretion of moments that add up to where we are now,,where trivia becomes news.,And more and more, less and less awareness of the pain of the other.,Huh. You know, I don't know if you could use this or not,,but I was quoting Wright Morris, a writer from Nebraska, who says,,'We're more and more into communications,and less and less into communication.',Okay, kids, I got to scram, got to go see my cardiologist.",And that's Studs Terkel.,(Applause) 
 So, talk about risk taking. I'm going to do somebody that nobody likes.,You know, most actors want to do characters that are likeable --,well, not always, but the notion, especially at a conference like this,,I like to inspire people.,But since this was called "risk taking,",I'm doing somebody who I never do, because she's so unlikeable,that one person actually came backstage,and told me to take her out of the show she was in.,And I'm doing her because I think we think of risk,,at a conference like this, as a good thing. 
 But there are certain other connotations to the word "risk,",and the same thing about the word "nature." What is nature?,Maxine Greene, who's a wonderful philosopher,who's as old as Studs, and was the head of a philosophy --,great, big philosophy kind of an organization --,I went to her and asked her what are the two things,that she doesn't know, that she still wants to know.,And she said, "Well, personally, I still feel like I have to curtsey,when I see the president of my university.,And I still feel as though I've got to get coffee,for my male colleagues, even though I've outlived most of them.",And she said, "And then intellectually,,I don't know enough about the negative imagination.,And September 11th certainly taught us,that that's a whole area we don't investigate." 
 So this piece is about a negative imagination.,It raises questions about what nature is, what Mother Nature is,,and about what a risk can be.,And I got this in the Maryland Correctional Institute for Women.,Everything I do is word for word off a tape.,And I title things because I think people speak in organic poems,,and this is called "A Mirror to Her Mouth.",And this is an inmate named Paulette Jenkins. 
 "I began to learn how to cover it up,,because I didn't want nobody to know that this was happening in my home.,I want everybody to think we were a normal family.,I mean we had all the materialistic things,,but that didn't make my children pain any less;,that didn't make their fears subside.,I ran out of excuses about how we got black eyes,and busted lips and bruises. I didn't had no more excuses.,And he beat me too. But that didn't change the fact,that it was a nightmare for my family; it was a nightmare.,And I failed them dramatically,,because I allowed it to go on and on and on. 
 "But the night that Myesha got killed --,and the intensity just grew and grew and grew,,until one night we came home from getting drugs,,and he got angry with Myesha, and he started beating her,,and he put her in a bathtub. Oh, he would use a belt.,He had a belt because he had this warped perverted thing,that Myesha was having sex with her little brother,and they was fondling each other -- that would be his reason.,I'm just talking about the particular night that she died.,And so he put her in the bathtub,,and I was in the bedroom with the baby. 
 "And four months before this happened, four months before Myesha died,,I thought I could really fix this man. So I had a baby by him -- insane --,thinking that if I gave him his own kid, he would leave mine alone.,And it didn't work, didn't work.,And I ended up with three children, Houston, Myesha and Dominic,,who was four months old when I came to jail. 
 "And I was in the bedroom. Like I said, he had her in the bathroom,and he -- he -- every time he hit her, she would fall.,And she would hit her head on the tub. It happened continuously, repeatedly.,I could hear it, but I dared not to move. I didn't move.,I didn't even go and see what was happening.,I just sat there and listened.,And then he put her in the hallway.,He told her, just set there. And so she set there for about four or five hours.,And then he told her, get up.,And when she got up, she says she couldn't see.,Her face was bruised. She had a black eye.,All around her head was just swollen;,her head was about two sizes of its own size.,I told him, 'Let her go to sleep.' He let her go to sleep. 
 "The next morning she was dead.,He went in to check on her for school, and he got very excited.,He says, 'She won't breathe.',I knew immediately that she was dead.,I didn't even want to accept the fact that she was dead, so I went in,and I put a mirror to her mouth --,there was no thing, nothing, coming out of her mouth.,He said, he said, he said,,'We can't, we can't let nobody find out about this.',He say, 'You've got to help me.' I agree. I agree. 
 "I mean, I've been keeping a secret for years and years and years,,so it just seemed like second hand to me, just to keep on keeping it a secret.,So we went to the mall and we told a police that we had, like, lost her,,that she was missing.,We told a security guard that she was missing,,though she wasn't missing.,And we told the security guard what we had put on her,and we went home and we dressed her in exactly the same thing,that we had told the security guard that we had put on her. 
 "And then we got the baby and my other child,,and we drove out to, like, I-95.,I was so petrified and so numb,,all I could look was in the rear-view mirror.,And he just laid her right on the shoulder of the highway.,My own child, I let that happen to.",So that's an investigation of the negative imagination.,(Applause) 
 When I started this project,called "On the Road: A Search For an American Character",with my tape recorder, I thought that I was going to go around America,and find it in all its aspects -- bull riders, cowboys, pig farmers,,drum majorettes -- but I sort of got tripped on race relations,,because my first big show was a show about a race riot.,And so I went to both -- two race riots,,one of which was the Los Angeles riot. And this next piece is from that.,Because this is what I would say,I've learned the most about race relations, from this piece.,It's a kind of an aria, I would say, and in many tapes that I have. 
 Everybody knows that the Los Angeles riots happened,because four cops beat up a black man named Rodney King.,It was captured on videotape -- technology --,and it was played all over the world.,Everybody thought the four cops would go to jail.,They did not, so there were riots.,And what a lot of people forget, is there was a second trial,,ordered by George Bush, Sr.,And that trial came back with two cops going to jail,and two cops declared innocent. I was at that trial.,And I mean, the people just danced in the streets,because they were afraid there was going to be another riot.,Explosion of joy that this verdict had come back this way. 
 So there was a community that didn't -- the Korean-Americans,,whose stores had been burned to the ground.,And so this woman, Mrs. Young-Soon Han,,I suppose will have taught me the most that I have learned about race.,And she asks also a question that Studs talks about:,this notion of the "official truth," to question the "official truth.",So what she's questioning here, she's taking a chance,and questioning what justice is in society.,And this is called, "Swallowing the Bitterness." 
 "I used to believe America was the best.,I watched in Korea many luxurious Hollywood lifestyle movie.,I never saw any poor man, any black.,Until 1992, I used to believe America was the best -- I still do;,I don't deny that because I am a victim.,But at the end of '92, when we were in such turmoil,,and having all the financial problems, and all the mental problems,,I began to really realize that Koreans,are completely left out of this society and we are nothing.,Why? Why do we have to be left out?,We didn't qualify for medical treatment, no food stamp, no GR, 
 no welfare, anything. Many African-Americans who never work,got minimum amount of money to survive.,We didn't get any because we have a car and a house.,And we are high taxpayer. Where do I find justice?,"OK. OK? OK. OK.,Many African-Americans probably think that they won by the trial.,I was sitting here watching them the morning after the verdict,,and all the day they were having a party, they celebrated,,all of South Central, all the churches. And they say,,'Well, finally justice has been done in this society.',Well, what about victims' rights?,They got their rights by destroying innocent Korean merchants.,They have a lot of respect, as I do, for Dr. Martin King.,He is the only model for black community; I don't care Jesse Jackson.,He is the model of non-violence, non-violence --,and they would all like to be in his spirit. 
 "But what about 1992? They destroyed innocent people.,And I wonder if that is really justice,for them, to get their rights in that way.,I was swallowing the bitterness, sitting here alone and watching them.,They became so hilarious, but I was happy for them.,I was glad for them. At least they got something back, OK.,Let's just forget about Korean victims and other victims,who were destroyed by them.,They fought for their rights for over two centuries,,and maybe because they sacrifice other minorities,,Hispanic, Asian, we would suffer more in the mainstream.,That's why I understand;,that's why I have a mixed feeling about the verdict. 
 "But I wish that, I wish that, I wish that,I could be part of the enjoyment.,I wish that I could live together with black people.,But after the riot, it's too much difference.,The fire is still there. How do you say it? [Unclear].,Igniting, igniting, igniting fire. Igniting fire.,It's still there; it can burst out anytime.",Mrs. Young-Soon Han.,(Applause) 
 The other reason that I don't wear shoes,is just in case I really feel like I have to cuddle up,and get into the feet of somebody,,walking really in somebody else's shoes.,And I told you that in -- you know, I didn't give you the year,,but in '79 I thought that I was going to go around,and find bull riders and pig farmers and people like that,,and I got sidetracked on race relations. 
 Finally, I did find a bull rider, two years ago.,And I've been going to the rodeos with him, and we've bonded.,And he's the lead in an op-ed I did about the Republican Convention.,He's a Republican -- I won't say anything about my party affiliation, but anyway --,so this is my dear, dear Brent Williams,,and this is on toughness,,in case anybody needs to know about being tough,for the work that you do. I think there's a real lesson in this.,And this is called "Toughness." 
 "Well, I'm an optimist. I mean basically I'm an optimist.,I mean, you know, I mean, it's like my wife, Jolene,,her family's always saying,,you know, you ever think he's just a born loser?,It seems like he has so much bad luck, you know.,But then when that bull stepped on my kidney, you know,,I didn't lose my kidney -- I could have lost my kidney,,I kept my kidney, so I don't think I'm a born loser.,I think that's good luck.,(Laughter) 
 "And, I mean, funny things like this happen.,I was in a doctor's office last CAT scan,,and there was a Reader's Digest, October 2002.,It was like, 'seven ways to get lucky.' And it says,if you want to get lucky,,you know, you've got to be around positive people.,I mean, like even when I told my wife that you want to come out here,and talk to me, she's like, 'She's just talking;,she's just being nice to you. She's not going to do that.' 
 "And then you called me up and you said you wanted to come out here,and interview me and she went and looked you up on the Internet.,She said, 'Look who she is.,You're not even going to be able to answer her questions.',(Laughter),And she was saying you're going to make me look like an idiot,because I've never been to college,,and I wouldn't be talking professional or anything.,I said, 'Well look, the woman talked to me for four hours.,You know, if I wasn't talking -- you know,,like, you know, she wanted me to talk,,I don't think she would even come out here.' 
 "Confidence? Well, I think I ride,more out of determination than confidence.,I mean, confidence is like, you know,,you've been on that bull before; you know you can ride him.,I mean, confidence is kind of like being cocky, but in a good way.,But determination, you know, it's like just, you know, 'Fuck the form,,get the horn.',(Laughter),That's Tuff Hedeman, in the movie '8 Seconds.',I mean, like, Pat O'Mealey always said when I was a boy,,he say, 'You know, you got more try than any kid I ever seen.',And try and determination is the same thing.,Determination is, like, you're going to hang on that bull,,even if you're riding upside down.,Determination's like, you're going to ride,till your head hits the back of the dirt. 
 "Freedom? It would have to be the rodeo. 
 "Beauty? I don't think I know what beauty is.,Well, you know, I guess that'd have to be the rodeo too.,I mean, look how we are, the roughy family,,palling around and shaking hands and wrestling around me.,It's like, you know, racking up our credit cards on entry fees and gas.,We ride together, we, you know, we, we eat together,and we sleep together.,I mean, I can't even imagine what it's going to be like,the last day I rodeo. I mean, I'll be alright.,I mean, I have my ranch and everything,,but I actually don't even want to think the day that comes.,I mean, I guess it just be like --,I guess it be like the day my brother died. 
 "Toughness? Well, we was in West Jordan, Utah, and this bull,shoved my face right through the metal shoots in a --,you know, busted my face all up and had to go to the hospital.,And they had to sew me up and straighten my nose out.,And I had to go and ride in the rodeo that night,,so I didn't want them to put me under anesthesia,,or whatever you call it. And so they sewed my face up.,And then they had to straighten out my nose,,and they took these rods and shoved them up my nose,and went up through my brains,and felt like it was coming out the top of my head,,and everybody said that it should have killed me,,but it didn't, because I guess I have a high tolerance for pain.,(Laughter),But the good thing was, once they shoved those rods up there,and straightened my nose out, I could breathe,,and I hadn't been able to breathe,since I broke my nose in the high school rodeo." 
 Thank you.,(Applause)My name is Lovegrove.,I only know nine Lovegroves,ntwo of which are my parents.,They are first cousins, and you knownwhat happens when, you know -- 
 (Laughter) 
 So there's a terribly weirdnfreaky side to me,,which I'm fighting with all the time.,So to try and get through today,,I've kind of disciplined myselfnwith an 18-minute talk.,I was hanging on to have a pee.,I thought perhapsnif I was hanging on long enough,,that would guide menthrough the 18 minutes. 
 (Laughter) 
 OK. I am known as Captain Organic,and that's a philosophical positionnas well as an aesthetic position.,But today what I'd like to talknto you about is that love of form,and how form can touchnpeople's soul and emotion.,Not very long ago,nnot many thousands of years ago,,we actually lived in caves,,and I don't thinknwe've lost that coding system.,We respond so well to form.,But I'm interestednin creating intelligent form.,I'm not interested at all in blobism,or any of that superficial rubbishnthat you see coming out as design.,This artificially inducednconsumerism -- I think it's atrocious. 
 My world is the worldnof people like Amory Lovins,,Janine Benyus, James Watson.,I'm in that world,nbut I work purely instinctively.,I'm not a scientist.nI could have been, perhaps,,but I work in this worldnwhere I trust my instincts.,So I am a 21st-centuryntranslator of technology,into products that we use everydaynand relate beautifully and naturally with.,And we should be developing things --nwe should be developing packaging,for ideas which elevatenpeople's perceptions,and respect for the thingsnthat we dig out of the earth,and translate into productsnfor everyday use.,So, the water bottle. 
 I'll begin with this conceptnof what I call DNA.,DNA: Design, Nature, Art.,These are the three thingsnthat condition my world.,Here is a drawing by Leonardo da Vinci,n500 years ago, before photography.,It shows how observation,ncuriosity and instinct,work to create amazing art.,Industrial design is the art formnof the 21st century.,People like Leonardo --nthere have not been many --,had this amazingly instinctive curiosity.,I work from a similar position.,I don't want to soundnpretentious saying that,,but this is my drawing madenon a digital pad a couple of years ago --,well into the 21st century,n500 years later.,It's my impression of water.,Impressionism being the most valuablenart form on the planet as we know it:,100 million dollars, easily, for a Monet. 
 I use, now, a whole new process.,A few years ago I reinvented my process,to keep up with people like Greg Lynn,nThom Mayne, Zaha Hadid, Rem Koolhaas --,all these people that I thinknare persevering and pioneering,with fantastic new ideasnof how to create form.,This is all created digitally.,Here you see the machining,nthe milling of a block of acrylic.,This is what I show to the client to say,n"That's what I want to do.",At that point, I don't knownif that's possible at all.,It's a seductor, but I just feelnin my bones that that's possible. 
 So we go, we look at the tooling.,We look at how that is produced.,These are the invisible thingsnthat you never see in your life.,This is the background noisenof industrial design.,That is like an Anish Kapoornflowing through a Richard Serra.,It is more valuablenthan the product in my eyes.,I don't have one.,When I do make some money,nI'll have one machined for myself.,This is the final product.,When they sent it to me,nI thought I'd failed.,It felt like nothing.nIt has to feel like nothing.,It was when I put the water in,that I realized that I'd putna skin on water itself.,It's an icon of water itself,,and it elevates people's perceptionnof contemporary design.,Each bottle is different,,meaning the water levelnwill give you a different shape.,It's mass individualismnfrom a single product.,It fits the hand.,It fits arthritic hands.nIt fits children's hands.,It makes the product strong,nthe tessellation.,It's a millefiori of ideas.,In the future, they will look like that,,because we need to move awaynfrom those type of polymers,and use that for medical equipment,and more important things,nperhaps, in life.,Biopolymers, these newnideas for materials,,will come into play in probably a decade.,It doesn't look as cool, does it?,But I can live up to that.nI don't have a problem with that.,I design for that condition,nbiopolymers. It's the future. 
 I took this video in Cape Town last year.,This is the freaky side coming out.,I have this special interestnin things like this, which blow my mind.,I don't know whether to,nyou know, drop to my knees, cry;,I don't know what I think.,But I just know that nature --,nature improves with ever-greater purpose,that which once existed,,and that strangenessnis a consequence of innovative thinking.,When I look at these things,nthey look pretty normal to me.,But these things evolved over many years,nand what we're trying to do --,I get three weeks to design a telephone.nHow the hell do I do that,,when you get these things that takenhundreds of millions of years to evolve?,How do you condense that? 
 It comes back to instinct.,I'm not talking about designingntelephones that look like that,and I'm not lookingnat designing architecture like that.,I'm just interestednin natural growth patterns,and the beautiful formsnthat only nature really creates.,How that flows through menand how that comes out,is what I'm trying to understand. 
 This is a scan through the human forearm.,It's then blown upnthrough rapid prototyping,to reveal its cellular structure.,I have these in my office.,My office is a mixturenof the Natural History Museum,and a NASA space lab.,It's a weird, kind of freaky place.,This is one of my specimens. 
 This is made --,bone is made from a mixturenof inorganic minerals and polymers.,I studied cooking in schoolnfor four years, and in that experience,,which was called "domestic science,",it was a bit of a cheap trick for mento try and get a science qualification. 
 (Laughter) 
 Actually, I put marijuananin everything I cooked -- 
 (Laughter) 
 And I had access to allnthe best girls. It was fabulous.,All the guys in the rugby teamncouldn't understand.,Anyway -- this is a meringue.,This is another sample I have.,A meringue is made exactly the same way,nin my estimation, as a bone.,It's made fromnpolysaccharides and proteins.,If you pour water on that, it dissolves.,Could we be manufacturingnfrom foodstuffs in the future?,Not a bad idea. I don't know.,I need to talk to Janinenand a few other people about that,,but I believe instinctively thatnthat meringue can become something,,a car -- I don't know. 
 I'm also interested in growth patterns:,the unbridled way that nature grows things,so you're not restricted by form at all.,These interrelated forms,nthey do inspire everything I do,,although I might end upnmaking something incredibly simple.,This is a detail of a chairnthat I've designed in magnesium.,It shows this interlocution of elementsnand the beauty of, kind of, engineering,and biological thinking,,shown pretty much as a bone structure.,Any one of those elementsnyou could sort of hang on the wall,as some kind of art object. 
 It's the world's first chairnmade in magnesium.,It cost 1.7 million dollars to develop.,It's called "Go," by Bernhardt, USA.,It went into Time magazine in 2001nas the new language of the 21st century.,Boy. For somebody growing up in Walesnin a little village, that's enough.,It shows how you make one holistic form,nlike the car industry,,and then you break up what you need.,This is an absolutelynbeautiful way of working.,It's a godly way of working.,It's organic and it's essential.,It's an absolutely fat-free design,,and when you look at it,nyou see human beings. 
 When that moves into polymers,,you can change the elasticity,nthe fluidity of the form.,This is an idea for a gas-injected,none-piece polymer chair.,What nature doesnis it drills holes in things.,It liberates form.,It takes away anything extraneous.,That's what I do.,I make organic things which are essential.,And they look funky, too --nbut I don't set out to make funky things,because I thinknthat's an absolute disgrace. 
 I set out to look at natural forms.,If you took the idea of fractal technologynfurther, take a membrane,,shrinking it down constantlynlike nature does --,that could be a seat for a chair.,It could be a sole for a sports shoe.,It could be a car blending into seats.,Wow. Let's go for it.nThat's the kind of stuff.,This is what exists in nature.,Observation now allows usnto bring that natural process,into the design process every day.,That's what I do. 
 This is a shownthat's currently on in Tokyo.,It's called "Superliquidity."nIt's my sculptural investigation.,It's like 21st-century Henry Moore.,When you see a Henry Moore, still,nyour hair stands up.,There's some amazing spiritual connect.,If he was a car designer,nphew, we'd all be driving one.,In his day, he wasnthe highest taxpayer in Britain. 
 That is the power of organic design.,It contributes immensely to our --,sense of being,,our sense of relationships with things,,our sensuality and,nyou know, the sort of --,even the sort of socio-erotic side,nwhich is very important.,This is my artwork.nThis is all my process.,These actually are sold as artwork.nThey're very big prints.,But this is how I get to that object. 
 Ironically, that object was madenby the Killarney process,,which is a brand-new process herenfor the 21st century,,and I can hear Greg Lynnnlaughing his socks off as I say that.,I'll tell you about that later. 
 When I look into these data images,,I see new things.,It's self-inspired.,Diatomic structures, radiolaria,,the things that we couldn't seenbut we can do now --,these, again, are cored out.,They're made virtually from nothing.nThey're made from silica.,Why not structures from cars like that?,Coral, all these natural forces,,take away what they don't neednand they deliver maximum beauty.,We need to be in that realm.,I want to do stuff like that. 
 This is a new chair which shouldncome on the market in September.,It's for a company called Moroso in Italy.nIt's a gas-injected polymer chair.,Those holes you see therenare very filtered-down,,watered-down versions of the extremitynof the diatomic structures.,It goes with the flownof the polymer and you'll see --,there's an image coming upnright now that shows the full thing.,It's great to have companies in Italynwho support this way of dreaming.,If you see the shadowsnthat come through that,,they're actually probablynmore important than the product,,but it's the minimum it takes.,The coring out of the backnlets you breathe.,It takes away any material you don't need,and it actually garners flexure too. 
 I was going to break into a dance then. 
 This is some current work I'm doing.,I'm looking at single-surface structures,and how they stretch and flow.,It's based on furniture typologies,nbut that's not the end motivation.,It's made from aluminum ...,as opposed to aluminium, and it's grown.,It's grown in my mind,,and then it's grown in termsnof the whole process that I go through. 
 This is two weeks ago in CCP in Coventry,nwho build parts for Bentleys and so on.,It's being built as we speak,and it will be on show in Phillipsnnext year in New York.,I have a big shownwith Phillips Auctioneers.,When I see these animations,noh Jesus, I'm blown away.,This is what goes onnin my studio everyday.,I walk -- I'm traveling. I come back.,Some guy's got that on a computer --nthere's this like, oh my goodness.,So I try to create this energynof invention every day in my studio.,This kind of effervescent --,fully charged sense of soupnthat delivers ideas. 
 Single-surface products.,Furniture's a good one.,How you grow legs out of a surface.,I would love to build this one day,and perhaps I'd likento build it also out of flour, sugar,,polymer, wood chips --nI don't know, human hair.,I don't know. I'd love a go at that.nI don't know. If I just got some time.,That's the weird side coming out again.nA lot of companies don't understand that. 
 Three weeks ago I was with Sony in Tokyo.,They said, "Give us the dream.nWhat is our dream? How do we beat Apple?",I said, "You don't copy Apple,nthat's for sure.,You get into biopolymers.",They looked straight through me.,What a waste. Anyway. 
 (Laughter) 
 No, it's true. Fuck them.nYou know, I mean -- 
 (Laughter) 
 I'm delivering; they're not taking.,I've had this image 20 years.,I've had this image of a water dropletnfor 20 years, sitting on a hot bed.,That is an image of a car for me.,That's the car of the future.nIt's a water droplet.,I've been banging on about thisnlike I can't believe.,Cars are all wrong. 
 I'm going to show younsomething a bit weird now.,They laughed everywherenover the world I showed this.,The only placenthat didn't laugh was Moscow.,Cars are made from 30,000 components.,How ridiculous is that?nCouldn't you make that from 300?,It's got a vacuum-formed,ncarbon-nylon pan.,Everything's holistically integrated.nIt opens and closes like a bread bin.,There is no engine.nThere's a solar panel on the back,and there are batteries in the wheels;nthey're fitted like Formula 1.,You take them off your wall,nyou plug them in. Off you go.,A three-wheeled car: slow, feminine,,transparent, so you can seenthe people in there.,You drive different.,You see that thing. You do. You do.,And not anesthetized, separated from life.,There's a hole at the frontnand there's a reason for that.,It's a city car.nYou drive along. You get out.,You drive on to a proboscis. You get out.,It lifts you up.,It presents the solar panel to the sun,nand at night, it's a street lamp. 
 (Applause) 
 That's what happens if you get inspirednby the street lamp first,,and do the car second.,I can see these bubblesnwith these hydrogen packages,,floating aroundnon the ground, driven by AI.,When I showed this in South Africa,,everybody afterwards was going,n"Hey, car on a stick. Like this.",Can you imagine? A car on a stick. 
 (Laughter) 
 If you put it next toncontemporary architecture,,it feels totally natural to me.,And that's what I do with my furniture.,I'm not putting Charles Eames'nfurniture in buildings anymore.,I'm trying to build furniturenwhich fits architecture.,I'm trying to buildntransportation systems.,I work on aircraft for Airbus,,I do all this sort of stuff,trying to force these natural,ninspired-by-nature dreams home. 
 I'm going to finish on two things.,This is the stereolithographynof a staircase.,It's a little bit of a dedicationnto James, James Watson.,I built this thing for my studio.,It cost me 250,000 dollars to build this.,Most people go and buy the Aston Martin.,I built this.,This is the data that goes with that.nIncredibly complex.,Took about two years,nbecause I'm looking for fat-free design.,Lean, efficient things. Healthy products.,This is built by composites.,It's a single element which rotates aroundnto create a holistic element,,and this is a carbon-fiber handrailnwhich is only supported in two places.,Modern materialsnallow us to do modern things. 
 This is a shot in the studio.,This is how it looksnpretty much every day.,You wouldn't want to havena fear of heights coming down it.,There is virtually no handrail.nIt doesn't pass any standards. 
 (Laughter) 
 Who cares? 
 (Laughter) 
 And it has an internal handrailnwhich gives it its strength.,It's this holistic integration.nThat's my studio. It's subterranean.,It's in Notting Hill,nnext to all the crap --,the prostitutes and all that stuff.,It's next to David Hockney'snoriginal studio.,It has a lighting systemnthat changes throughout the day.,My guys go out for lunch.nThe door's open. They come back in,,because it's normally rainingnand they prefer to stay in. 
 This is my studio.,Elephant skullnfrom Oxford University, 1988.,I bought that last year.nThey're very difficult to find.,If anybody's got a whale skeletonnthey want to sell me,,I'll put it in the studio. 
 So I'm just goingnto interject a little bit,with some of the thingsnthat you'll see in the video.,It's a homemade video, made it myselfnat three o'clock in the morning,just to show you how my real world is.,You never see that.,You never see architects or designersnshowing you their real world. 
 This is called a "Plasnet.",It's a new bio-polycarbonate chairnI'm doing in Italy. 
 World's first bamboo bikenwith folding handlebars.,We should all be riding one of these.,As China buys all these crappy cars,nwe should be riding things like this.,Counterbalance. 
 Like I say, it's a cross,between Natural History Museumnand a NASA laboratory.,It's full of prototypes and objects.,It's self-inspirational, again.,I mean, the rare times when I'm there,,I do enjoy it.,And I get lots and lots of kids coming.,I'm a contaminator for all those childrennof investment bankers -- wankers.,Sorry. 
 (Laughter) 
 That's a solar seed.nIt's a concept for new architecture.,That thing on the top is the world'snfirst solar-powered garden lamp --,the first produced.,Giles Revell should bentalking here today --,amazing photographynof things you can't see. 
 The first sculptural modelnI made for that thing in Tokyo. 
 Lots of stuff.nThere's a little leaf chair --,that golden looking thingnis called "Leaf.",It's made from Kevlar. 
 On the wall is my bookncalled "Supernatural,",which allows me to remembernwhat I've done, because I forget. 
 There's an aerated bricknI did in Limoges last year,,in Concepts for New Ceramicsnin Architecture. 
 Gernot Oberfell, workingnat three o'clock in the morning --,and I don't pay overtime.,Overtime is the passion of design,,so join the club or don't. 
 (Laughter) 
 No, it's true. People like Tom and Greg --,we're traveling like you can't --nwe fit it all in.,I don't know how we do it. 
 Next week I'm at Electrolux in Sweden,nthen I'm in Beijing on Friday.,You work that one out.,And when I see Ed's photographs,nI think, why the hell am I going to China?,It's true. It's true.,Because there's a soulnin this whole thing.,We need to have a new instinctnfor the 21st century.,We need to combine all this stuff.,If all the people who werentalking over this period,worked on a car together,,it would be a joy, absolute joy. 
 So there's a new X-light systemnI'm doing in Japan. 
 There's Tuareg shoes from North Africa.nThere's a Kifwebe mask. 
 These are my sculptures. 
 A copper jelly mold. 
 (Laughter) 
 It sounds like some quiz shownor something, doesn't it?,So, it's going to end.,Thank you, James,nfor your great inspiration. 
 Thank you very much. 
 (Applause)I don't know your name. Audience Member: Howard. Howard. 
 Thom Mayne: Howard? I'm sitting next to Howard. I don't know Howard, obviously,,and he's going, I hope you're not next. 
 (Laughter) 
 Amazing. Amazing performance.,I kind of erased everything in my brain to follow that.,Let me start some place. I'm interested --,I kind of do the same thing, but I don't move my body. (Laughter),And instead of using human figures to develop ideas of time and space,,I work in the mineral world. I work with more or less inert matter.,And I organize it. And, well, it's also a bit different,because an architect versus, let's say, a dance company,finally is a negotiation between one's private world,,one's conceptual world, the world of ideas, the world of aspirations,,of inventions, with the relationship of the exterior world,and all the limitations, the naysayers.,Because I have to say, for my whole career,,if there's anything that's been consistent, it's been that you can't do it.,No matter what I've done, what I've tried to do,,everybody says it can't be done.,And it's continuous across the complete spectrum of the various,kind of realities that you confront with your ideas. 
 And to be an architect, somehow you have to negotiate between left and right,,and you have to negotiate between this very private place where ideas take place,and the outside world, and then make it understood.,I can start any number of places, because this process is also --,I think -- very different from some of the morning sessions,,which you had such a kind of very clear, such a lineal idea,,like the last one, say, with Howard,,that I think the creative process in architecture,,the design process, is extremely circuitous. It's labyrinthine.,It's Calvino's idea of the quickest way between two points,is the circuitous line, not the straight line.,And definitely my life has been part of that.,I'm going to start with some simple kind of,notions of how we organize things. 
 But basically, what we do is, we try to give coherence to the world.,We make physical things, buildings,that become a part in an accretional process; they make cities.,And those things are the reflection of the processes,,and the time that they are made.,And what I'm doing is attempting to synthesize the way one sees the world,and the territories which are useful as generative material.,Because, really, all I'm interested in, always, as an architect,,is the way things are produced because that's what I do. Right?,And it's not based on an a priori notion.,I have no interest at all in conceiving something in my brain,and saying, "This is what it looks like." In fact, somebody mentioned --,Ewan, maybe it was you in your introduction --,about this is what architects --,did somebody say it's what business people come to,,it's what the corporate world comes to,when they want to make it look like something at the end of the line? Huh. Wow.,It doesn't work that way for me at all.,I have no interest in that whatsoever. 
 Architecture is the beginning of something, because it's --,if you're not involved in first principles,,if you're not involved in the absolute,,the beginning of that generative process, it's cake decoration.,And I've nothing wrong with cake decoration and cake decorators,,if anybody's involved in cake decorations --,it's not what I'm interested in doing. (Laughter),And so, in the formation of things, in giving it form,,in concretizing these things,,it starts with some notion of how one organizes.,And I've had for 30 years an interest in a series of complexities,where a series of forces are brought to bear,,and to understand the nature of the final result of that,,representing the building itself.,There's been a continual relationship between inventions,,which are private, and reality, which has been important to me. 
 A project which is part of an exhibition in Copenhagen 10 years ago,,which was the modeling of a hippocampus --,the territory of the brain that records short-term memory --,and the documentation of that, the imaginative and documentation of that,through a series of drawings which literally attempt to organize that experience.,And it had to do with the notion of walking a kilometer,,observing every kilometer a particular object of desire,,and then placing that within this.,And the notion was that I could make an organization,not built on normal coherencies, but built on non-sequiturs, built on randomness.,And I'd been extremely interested in this notion of randomness,as it produces architectural work,and as it definitely connects to the notion of the city,,an accretional notion of the city,,and that led to various ideas of organization.,And then this led to broader ideas of buildings,that come together through the multiplicity of systems. 
 And it's not any single system that makes the work.,It's the relationship -- it's the dynamics between the systems --,which have the power to transform and invent,and produce an architecture that is -- that would otherwise not exist.,And those systems could be identified,,and they could be grouped together.,And of course, today, with the technology of the computer,and with the rapid prototyping, etc., we have the mechanisms,to understand and to respond to these systems,,and to allow them to adjust to the various accommodations of functionalities,because that's all we do.,We're producing spaces that accommodate human activity.,And what I'm interested in is not the styling of that,,but the relationship of that as it enhances that activity.,And that directly connects to ideas of city-making. 
 This is a project that we just finished in Penang,for a very, very large city project that came directly out of this process,,which is the result of the multiplicity of forces that produce it.,And the project -- again, enormous, enormous competition --,on the Hudson River and in New York,that we were asked to do three years ago, which uses these processes.,And what you're looking at are possibilities that have to do,with the generation of the city as one applies a methodology,that uses notions of these multiple forces,,that deals with the enormity of the problem, the complexity of the problem,,when we're designing cities at larger and larger aggregates.,Because one of the issues today is,that the economic aggregate is driving the development aggregate,,and as the aggregates get larger we require,more and more complex investigation processes to solve these problems.,And that led us directly to the Olympic Village. 
 I was in New York on Monday presenting it to the IOC.,We won the competition -- what was it, nine months ago?,Again, a direct reflection from using these processes,to develop extremely complicated, very large-scale organisms.,And then, also, was working with broad strategies.,In this case, we only used 15 of the 60 acres of land,,and the 45 acres was a park and would become the legacy of the Olympic Village.,And it would become the second largest park in the boroughs, etc.,Its position, of course, in the middle of Manhattan -- it's on Hunter's Point.,And then the broader ideas of city-making,start having direct influences on architecture,,on the elements that make up the broader scheme,,the buildings themselves, and start guiding us.,Architecture for me has been an investigation of a multiplicity of forces,that could come from literally any place.,And so I can start this discussion in any number of places,,and I've chosen three or four to talk about.,And it has also to do with an interest in,the vast kind of territory that architecture touches.,It literally is connected to anything in terms of knowledge base.,There's just no place that it doesn't somehow,have a connective tissue to. 
 This is Jim Dine, and it's the absence of presence, etc.,It's the clothing, the skin, without the presence of the character.,It became kind of an idea for the notion of the surface of a work,,and it was used in a project where we could unravel that surface,,and it was a figurative idea that was going to be folded,and made into a very, kind of complex space.,And the idea was the relationship of the space,,which was made up of the fold of the image,,and the dialectic or the conflict between the figuration,,and the clarity of the image,and the complexity of the space, which were in dialog.,And it made us rethink the whole notion of how we work,and how we make things,,and it led us to ideas that were closer to fashion design as we flattened out surfaces,,and then brought them back together as they could make spatial combinations.,And this was the first prototype in Korea,,as we're dealing with a dynamic envelope,,and then the same characteristic of the fabric.,It has a material identity and it's translucent and it's porous,,and it allows us for a very different notion of what a skin of a building is.,And that turned right away into another project. 
 This is the Caltrans building in Los Angeles.,And now we're seeing as the skin and the body is differentiated.,Again, it's a very, very simple notion.,If you look at most buildings,,what you look at is the building, the facade, and it is the building.,And all of a sudden we're kind of moving away,,and we're separating the skin from the body,,and that's going to lead to broader performance criteria,,which I'm going to talk about in a minute.,And you're looking at how it drapes over,and differentiates from the body.,And then, again, the building itself,,middle of Los Angeles, right across from City Hall.,And as it moves, it takes pieces of the earth with it. It bends up.,It's part of a sign system,,which was part of the kind of legacy of Los Angeles --,the two-dimension, three-dimension signing, etc.,And then it allows one to penetrate the work itself.,It's transparent, and it allows you to understand, I think,,what is always the most interesting thing in any building,,which is the actual constructional processes that make it. 
 And it's probably the most intense kind of territory,of the work, which is not occupied,,because architecture is always the most interesting in some mechanism,when it's separated from function,,and this is an area that allows for that.,And then the skin starts transforming into other materials.,We're using light as a building material in this case.,We're working with Keith Sonnier in New York,,and we're making this large outside room,,which is possible in Los Angeles, and which is very much reflective,of the urban, the contemporary urban environments,that you would find in Shibuya or you'd find in Mexico City,or Sao Paulo, etc.,,that have to do with activating the city over a longer span of time.,And that was very much part of the notion,of the urban objective of this project in Los Angeles. 
 And, again, all of it promoting transparency.,And an image which may be closest talks about the use of light as a medium,,that light becomes literally a building material.,Well, that immediately turned into something much broader, and as a scope.,And again, we're looking at an early sketch,where I'm understanding now,that the skin can be a transition between the ground and the tower.,This is a building in San Francisco which is under construction.,And now it turned into something much, much broader as a problem,,and it has to do with performance.,This will be the first building in the United States that took --,well, I can't say it took the air conditioning out. It's a hybrid.,I wanted a pure thing, and I can't get it.,It's a wrong attitude, actually, because the hybrid is probably more interesting. 
 But we took the air conditioning out of the tower.,There's some air conditioning left in the base,,but the skin now moves on hydraulics.,It forces air through a Venturi force if there's no wind.,It adjusts continually. And we removed the air conditioning.,Huge, huge thing. Half a million dollars a year delta.,10 of these -- it's just under a million square feet --,800 and some thousand square feet --,10 of these would power Sausalito -- the delta on this.,And so now what we're looking at, as the projects get larger in scale,,as they interface with broader problems,,that they expand the capabilities,in terms of their performance.,Well, I could also start here.,We could talk about the relationship,at a more biological sense of the relationship of building and ground. 
 Well, our research -- my generation for sure,,people who were going to school in the late '60s --,made very much a shift out of the internal focus of architecture,,looking at architecture within its own territory,,and we were much more affected by film,,by what was going on in the art world, etc.,This is, of course, Michael Heizer.,And when I saw this, first an image and then visited,,it completely changed the way I thought after that point.,And I understood that building really could be,the augmentation of the Earth's surface,,and it completely shifted the notion of building ground in the most basic sense.,And then -- well, he was probably looking at this -- this is Nazca;,this is 700 years ago -- the most amazing four-kilometer land sculptures.,They're just totally incredible.,And that led us to then completely rethinking how we draw, how we work. 
 This is the first sketch of a high school in Pomona --,well, whatever it is, a model, a conceptual, kind of idea.,And it's the reshaping of the Earth to make it occupiable.,So it puts 200,000 square feet of stuff that make a high school work,in the surface of that Earth.,There it is modeled as it was developing into a piece of work.,And there it is, again, as it's starting to get resolved tectonically,,and then there's the school.,And, of course,,we're interested in participating with education.,I have absolutely no interest in producing a building,that just accommodates X, Y and Z function.,What I'm interested in are how these ideas,participate in the educational process of young people.,It demands some sort of notion of inquiry,because it's a system that's developed not sculpturally. 
 It's an idea that started from my first discussion.,It has to do with a broad, consistent logic,,and that logic could be understood as one occupies the building.,And there's an overt -- at least,,there's an attempt to make a very overt notion of a building,that connects to the land in a very different way,because I was interested in a very didactic approach to the problem,,as one would understand that.,And the second project that was just finished in Los Angeles,that uses some of the same ideas. It uses landscape as a major idea.,Then, again, we're doing the headquarters for NOAA --,National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Agency --,outside of Washington in Maryland.,And this is how they see the world.,They have 22 satellites zipping around at plus or minus 100 miles,,and the site's in red. 
 And what we really want to do -- well, the architects,,if there are architects out there, this is the Laugier Hut;,this is the primitive hut that's been around for so long --,and what we wanted to do is really build this,,because they see themselves as the caretakers of the world,,and we wanted them to look down at their satellite,,how they see their own site, that eight-acre site,,and we wanted nothing left. We wanted it to stay green.,There's actually three baseball fields on it right now,,and they're going to stay there.,We put one piece directly north-south,,and it holds the dishes at the ears, right?,And then right below that the processing, and the mission lift,,and the mission control room, and all the other spaces are underground.,And what you look at is an aircraft carrier,that's performance-driven by the cone vision of these satellite dishes.,And that the building itself is occupied in the lower portion,,broken up by a series of courts,,and it's five acres of uninterrupted, horizontal space,for their administrative offices.,And then that, in turn, propelled us to look at,larger-scale projects where this notion of landscape building interface,becomes a connective tissue. 
 The new capital competition for Berlin, four years ago.,And again we just finished the ECB --,actually Coop Himmelblau in Vienna just won this project,,where the building was separated into a series of landscape elements,that became part of a connective tissue of a park,,which is parallel to the river, and develops ideas of the buildings themselves,and becomes part of the connective fabric --,the social, cultural and the landscape, recreational fabric of the city.,And the building is no longer seen as an autonomous thing,,but something that's only inextricably connected,to this city and this place at this time. 
 And a project that was realized in Austria, the Hooper Bank,,which again used this idea of connecting typology,,the traditional buildings, and morphology,,or the relationship of the development of land as an idea,,into a complex, which is a piece of a city where we can see part of it,is literally just this augmenting,,this movement of the land that's a very simple idea of,just lifting it up and occupying it,,and other parts are much more energetic and intense.,And talk about that intensity,in terms of the collisions of the kind of events they make,that have to do with putting a series of systems together,,and then where part of it is in the ground, part of it is oppositional lifts.,One enters the building as it lifts off the ground,,and it becomes part of the idea.,And then the skin -- the edges of this --,all promote the dynamic, the movement of the building,as a series of seismic shifts, geologic shifts. Right? 
 And it makes for event space and then it breaks in places,that allow you to peer into the interior, and those interiors, again,,are promoting transparency for the workplace,,which has been a continual interest of ours.,And then, again, in a more, kind of traditional setting,,this is a graduate student housing in Toronto,,and it's very much about the relationship of a building,as it makes a connective tissue to the city.,The main idea was the gateway, where it breaks the site,,and the building occupies both the public space and the private space.,And it's that territory of -- it's this thing.,I visited the site many times, and everybody, kind of --,you can see this from two kilometers away; it's an exact center of the street,,and the whole notion is to engage the public,,to engage buildings as part of the public tissue of the city. 
 And finally, one of the most interesting projects -- it's a courthouse.,And what I want to talk about -- this is the Supreme Court, of course --,and, well, I'm dealing with Michael Hogan, the Chief Justice of Oregon.,You could not proceed without making this negotiation,between one's own values and the relationship,of the character you're working with and how he understands the court,,because I'm showing him, of course, Corbusier at Savoy,,which is 1928, which is the beginning of modern architecture.,Well, then we get to this image.,And this is where the project started. Because I'm going,,I'm interested in the phenomenon that's taking place in here.,And really what we're talking about is constructing reality. 
 And I'm a character that's extremely interested,in understanding the nature of that constructed reality,because there's no such thing as nature any more. Nature is gone.,Nature in the 19th-century sense, alright?,Nature is only a cultural edifice today, right?,We construct it and we construct those ideas.,And then of course, this one, our governor at the moment.,And we spent some time with Conan, believe it or not,,and then that led us to, kind of, the very differences of our worlds,from a legal and an artistic, architectural.,And it forced us to talk about notions of how we work,,and the dynamics of that, and what other sources of the work is.,And it led us to the project, the courthouse,,which is absolutely a part of a negotiation,between tradition and pieces of the traditional courthouse.,You'll find a stair that's the same length as the Supreme Court.,Here's a piano nobile, which is a device used in the Renaissance.,The courts were made of that. The skin is this series of layers,that reflect even rusticated stonework,,but which were embedded with fragments of the Constitution,,which were part of the little process,,all set on a plinth that defined it from the community.,Thank you so much. 
 (Applause)Thank you. It's really an honor and a privilege to be here,spending my last day as a teenager.,Today I want to talk to you about the future, but,first I'm going to tell you a bit about the past.,My story starts way before I was born.,My grandmother was on a train to Auschwitz, the death camp.,And she was going along the tracks, and the tracks split.,And somehow -- we don't really know exactly the whole story -- but,the train took the wrong track and went to a work camp rather than the death camp.,My grandmother survived and married my grandfather.,They were living in Hungary, and my mother was born.,And when my mother was two years old,,the Hungarian revolution was raging, and they decided to escape Hungary.,They got on a boat, and yet another divergence --,the boat was either going to Canada or to Australia.,They got on and didn't know where they were going, and ended up in Canada.,So, to make a long story short, they came to Canada.,My grandmother was a chemist. She worked at the Banting Institute in Toronto,,and at 44 she died of stomach cancer. I never met my grandmother,,but I carry on her name -- her exact name, Eva Vertes --,and I like to think I carry on her scientific passion, too. 
 I found this passion not far from here, actually, when I was nine years old.,My family was on a road trip and we were in the Grand Canyon.,And I had never been a reader when I was young --,my dad had tried me with the Hardy Boys; I tried Nancy Drew;,I tried all that -- and I just didn't like reading books.,And my mother bought this book when we were at the Grand Canyon,called "The Hot Zone." It was all about the outbreak of the Ebola virus.,And something about it just kind of drew me towards it.,There was this big sort of bumpy-looking virus on the cover,,and I just wanted to read it. I picked up that book,,and as we drove from the edge of the Grand Canyon,to Big Sur, and to, actually, here where we are today, in Monterey,,I read that book, and from when I was reading that book,,I knew that I wanted to have a life in medicine.,I wanted to be like the explorers I'd read about in the book,,who went into the jungles of Africa,,went into the research labs and just tried to figure out,what this deadly virus was. So from that moment on, I read every medical book,I could get my hands on, and I just loved it so much.,I was a passive observer of the medical world. 
 It wasn't until I entered high school that I thought,,"Maybe now, you know -- being a big high school kid --,I can maybe become an active part of this big medical world.",I was 14, and I emailed professors at the local university,to see if maybe I could go work in their lab. And hardly anyone responded.,But I mean, why would they respond to a 14-year-old, anyway?,And I got to go talk to one professor, Dr. Jacobs,,who accepted me into the lab.,At that time, I was really interested in neuroscience,and wanted to do a research project in neurology --,specifically looking at the effects of heavy metals on the developing nervous system.,So I started that, and worked in his lab for a year,,and found the results that I guess you'd expect to find,when you feed fruit flies heavy metals -- that it really, really impaired the nervous system.,The spinal cord had breaks. The neurons were crossing in every which way.,And from then I wanted to look not at impairment, but at prevention of impairment. 
 So that's what led me to Alzheimer's. I started reading about Alzheimer's,and tried to familiarize myself with the research,,and at the same time when I was in the --,I was reading in the medical library one day, and I read this article,about something called "purine derivatives.",And they seemed to have cell growth-promoting properties.,And being naive about the whole field, I kind of thought,,"Oh, you have cell death in Alzheimer's,which is causing the memory deficit, and then you have this compound --,purine derivatives -- that are promoting cell growth.",And so I thought, "Maybe if it can promote cell growth,,it can inhibit cell death, too.",And so that's the project that I pursued for that year,,and it's continuing now as well,,and found that a specific purine derivative called "guanidine",had inhibited the cell growth by approximately 60 percent.,So I presented those results at the International Science Fair,,which was just one of the most amazing experiences of my life.,And there I was awarded "Best in the World in Medicine,",which allowed me to get in, or at least get a foot in the door of the big medical world. 
 And from then on, since I was now in this huge exciting world,,I wanted to explore it all. I wanted it all at once, but knew I couldn't really get that.,And I stumbled across something called "cancer stem cells.",And this is really what I want to talk to you about today -- about cancer.,At first when I heard of cancer stem cells,,I didn't really know how to put the two together. I'd heard of stem cells,,and I'd heard of them as the panacea of the future --,the therapy of many diseases to come in the future, perhaps.,But I'd heard of cancer as the most feared disease of our time,,so how did the good and bad go together?,Last summer I worked at Stanford University, doing some research on cancer stem cells.,And while I was doing this, I was reading the cancer literature,,trying to -- again -- familiarize myself with this new medical field.,And it seemed that tumors actually begin from a stem cell.,This fascinated me. The more I read, the more I looked at cancer differently,and almost became less fearful of it. 
 It seems that cancer is a direct result to injury.,If you smoke, you damage your lung tissue, and then lung cancer arises.,If you drink, you damage your liver, and then liver cancer occurs.,And it was really interesting -- there were articles correlating,if you have a bone fracture, and then bone cancer arises.,Because what stem cells are -- they're these,phenomenal cells that really have the ability to differentiate,into any type of tissue.,So, if the body is sensing that you have damage to an organ,and then it's initiating cancer, it's almost as if this is a repair response.,And the cancer, the body is saying the lung tissue is damaged,,we need to repair the lung. And cancer is originating in the lung,trying to repair -- because you have this excessive proliferation,of these remarkable cells that really have the potential to become lung tissue.,But it's almost as if the body has originated this ingenious response,,but can't quite control it.,It hasn't yet become fine-tuned enough to finish what has been initiated.,So this really, really fascinated me. 
 And I really think that we can't think about cancer --,let alone any disease -- in such black-and-white terms.,If we eliminate cancer the way we're trying to do now, with chemotherapy and radiation,,we're bombarding the body or the cancer with toxins, or with radiation, trying to kill it.,It's almost as if we're getting back to this starting point.,We're removing the cancer cells, but we're revealing the previous damage,that the body has tried to fix.,Shouldn't we think about manipulation, rather than elimination?,If somehow we can cause these cells to differentiate --,to become bone tissue, lung tissue, liver tissue,,whatever that cancer has been put there to do --,it would be a repair process. We'd end up better than we were before cancer.,So, this really changed my view of looking at cancer.,And while I was reading all these articles about cancer,,it seemed that the articles -- a lot of them -- focused on, you know,,the genetics of breast cancer, and the genesis,and the progression of breast cancer --,tracking the cancer through the body, tracing where it is, where it goes. 
 But it struck me that I'd never heard of cancer of the heart,,or cancer of any skeletal muscle for that matter.,And skeletal muscle constitutes 50 percent of our body,,or over 50 percent of our body. And so at first I kind of thought,,"Well, maybe there's some obvious explanation,why skeletal muscle doesn't get cancer -- at least not that I know of.",So, I looked further into it, found as many articles as I could,,and it was amazing -- because it turned out that it was very rare.,Some articles even went as far as to say that skeletal muscle tissue,is resistant to cancer, and furthermore, not only to cancer,,but of metastases going to skeletal muscle.,And what metastases are is when the tumor --,when a piece -- breaks off and travels through the blood stream,and goes to a different organ. That's what a metastasis is.,It's the part of cancer that is the most dangerous.,If cancer was localized, we could likely remove it,,or somehow -- you know, it's contained. It's very contained.,But once it starts moving throughout the body, that's when it becomes deadly.,So the fact that not only did cancer not seem to originate in skeletal muscles,,but cancer didn't seem to go to skeletal muscle --,there seemed to be something here.,So these articles were saying, you know, "Skeletal --,metastasis to skeletal muscle -- is very rare.",But it was left at that. No one seemed to be asking why. 
 So I decided to ask why. At first -- the first thing I did,was I emailed some professors who,specialized in skeletal muscle physiology, and pretty much said,,"Hey, it seems like cancer doesn't really go to skeletal muscle.,Is there a reason for this?" And a lot of the replies I got were that,muscle is terminally differentiated tissue.,Meaning that you have muscle cells, but they're not dividing,,so it doesn't seem like a good target for cancer to hijack.,But then again, this fact that the metastases,didn't go to skeletal muscle made that seem unlikely.,And furthermore, that nervous tissue -- brain -- gets cancer,,and brain cells are also terminally differentiated.,So I decided to ask why. And here's some of, I guess, my hypotheses,that I'll be starting to investigate this May at the Sylvester Cancer Institute in Miami.,And I guess I'll keep investigating until I get the answers.,But I know that in science, once you get the answers,,inevitably you're going to have more questions.,So I guess you could say that I'll probably be doing this for the rest of my life. 
 Some of my hypotheses are that,when you first think about skeletal muscle,,there's a lot of blood vessels going to skeletal muscle.,And the first thing that makes me think is that,blood vessels are like highways for the tumor cells.,Tumor cells can travel through the blood vessels.,And you think, the more highways there are in a tissue,,the more likely it is to get cancer or to get metastases.,So first of all I thought, you know, "Wouldn't it be favorable,to cancer getting to skeletal muscle?" And as well,,cancer tumors require a process called angiogenesis,,which is really, the tumor recruits the blood vessels to itself,to supply itself with nutrients so it can grow.,Without angiogenesis, the tumor remains the size of a pinpoint and it's not harmful.,So angiogenesis is really a central process to the pathogenesis of cancer. 
 And one article that really stood out to me,when I was just reading about this, trying to figure out why cancer doesn't go to skeletal,muscle, was that it had reported 16 percent of micro-metastases,to skeletal muscle upon autopsy.,16 percent! Meaning that there were these pinpoint tumors in skeletal muscle,,but only .16 percent of actual metastases --,suggesting that maybe skeletal muscle is able to control the angiogenesis,,is able to control the tumors recruiting these blood vessels.,We use skeletal muscles so much. It's the one portion of our body --,our heart's always beating. We're always moving our muscles.,Is it possible that muscle somehow intuitively knows,that it needs this blood supply? It needs to be constantly contracting,,so therefore it's almost selfish. It's grabbing its blood vessels for itself.,Therefore, when a tumor comes into skeletal muscle tissue,,it can't get a blood supply, and can't grow. 
 So this suggests that maybe if there is an anti-angiogenic factor,in skeletal muscle -- or perhaps even more,,an angiogenic routing factor, so it can actually direct where the blood vessels grow --,this could be a potential future therapy for cancer.,And another thing that's really interesting is that,there's this whole -- the way tumors move throughout the body,,it's a very complex system -- and there's something called the chemokine network.,And chemokines are essentially chemical attractants,,and they're the stop and go signals for cancer.,So a tumor expresses chemokine receptors,,and another organ -- a distant organ somewhere in the body --,will have the corresponding chemokines,,and the tumor will see these chemokines and migrate towards it.,Is it possible that skeletal muscle doesn't express this type of molecules?,And the other really interesting thing is that,when skeletal muscle -- there's been several reports that when skeletal,muscle is injured, that's what correlates with metastases going to skeletal muscle. 
 And, furthermore, when skeletal muscle is injured,,that's what causes chemokines -- these signals saying,,"Cancer, you can come to me," the "go signs" for the tumors --,it causes them to highly express these chemokines.,So, there's so much interplay here.,I mean, there are so many possibilities,for why tumors don't go to skeletal muscle.,But it seems like by investigating, by attacking cancer,,by searching where cancer is not, there has got to be something --,there's got to be something -- that's making this tissue resistant to tumors.,And can we utilize -- can we take this property,,this compound, this receptor, whatever it is that's controlling these,anti-tumor properties and apply it to cancer therapy in general?,Now, one thing that kind of ties the resistance of skeletal muscle to cancer --,to the cancer as a repair response gone out of control in the body --,is that skeletal muscle has a factor in it called "MyoD.",And what MyoD essentially does is, it causes cells to differentiate,into muscle cells. So this compound, MyoD,,has been tested on a lot of different cell types and been shown to,actually convert this variety of cell types into skeletal muscle cells.,So, is it possible that the tumor cells are going to the skeletal muscle tissue,,but once in contact inside the skeletal muscle tissue,,MyoD acts upon these tumor cells and causes them,to become skeletal muscle cells?,Maybe tumor cells are being disguised as skeletal muscle cells,,and this is why it seems as if it is so rare. 
 It's not harmful; it has just repaired the muscle.,Muscle is constantly being used -- constantly being damaged.,If every time we tore a muscle,or every time we stretched a muscle or moved in a wrong way,,cancer occurred -- I mean, everybody would have cancer almost.,And I hate to say that. But it seems as though muscle cell,,possibly because of all its use, has adapted,faster than other body tissues to respond to injury,,to fine-tune this repair response and actually be able to finish the process,which the body wants to finish. I really believe that the human body is very,,very smart, and we can't counteract something the body is saying to do. 
 It's different when a bacteria comes into the body --,that's a foreign object -- we want that out.,But when the body is actually initiating a process,and we're calling it a disease, it doesn't seem as though elimination is,the right solution. So even to go from there, it's possible, although far-fetched,,that in the future we could almost think of cancer being used as a therapy.,If those diseases where tissues are deteriorating --,for example Alzheimer's, where the brain, the brain cells, die,and we need to restore new brain cells, new functional brain cells --,what if we could, in the future, use cancer? A tumor --,put it in the brain and cause it to differentiate into brain cells? 
 That's a very far-fetched idea, but I really believe that it may be possible.,These cells are so versatile, these cancer cells are so versatile --,we just have to manipulate them in the right way.,And again, some of these may be far-fetched, but,I figured if there's anywhere to present far-fetched ideas, it's here at TED, so,thank you very much. 
 (Applause)I think the future of this planet depends on humans,,not technology, and we already have the knowledge --,were kind of at the endgame with knowledge.,But were nowhere near the endgame,when it comes to our perception.,We still have one foot in the dark ages.,And when you listen to some of the presentations here --,and the extraordinary range of human capability, our understandings --,and then you contrast it with the fact,we still call this planet, "Earth:" its pretty extraordinary --,we have one foot in the dark ages. 
 Just quickly: Aristotle, his thing was, "Its not flat, stupid, its round.",Galileo -- he had the Inquisition, so he had to be a little bit more polite --,his was, "Its not in the middle, you know.",And Hawkes: "its not earth, stupid, its ocean.",This is an ocean planet.,T.S. Eliot really said it for me --,and this should give you goose bumps:,"we shall not cease from exploration,and the end of our exploring shall be to return,where we started and know the place for the first time.",And the next lines are, "Through the unknown remembered gate,,where the last of earth discovered,is that which is the beginning.",So I have one message.,It seems to me that were all pointed in the wrong direction. 
 For the rocketeers in the audience:,I love what youre doing, I admire the guts,,I admire the courage -- but your rockets,are pointed in the wrong goddamn direction.,(Laughter),And its all a question of perspective.,Let me try and tell you --,I dont mean to insult you, but look,,if I -- and Im not doing this for real,because it would be an insult,,so Im going to pretend, and it softens the blow --,Im going to tell you what youre thinking.,If I held up a square that was one foot square and the color of earth,,and I held up another square that was the root two square --,so its 1.5 times bigger -- and was the color of the oceans;,and I said, what is the relative value of these two things?,Well, its the relative importance.,You would say -- yeah, yeah, yeah, we all know this;,water covers twice the area of the planet than dry land.,But its a question of perception,,and if thats what youre thinking,,if thats what you think I mean when I say,,"This is an ocean planet stupidly called 'Earth.'",If you think that thats the relative importance,,two to one, youre wrong by a factor of ten.,Now, youre not as thick as two short planks,,but you sound like it when you say "Earth,",because that demonstration, if I turned around this way --,that earth plane would be as thin as paper.,Its a thin film, two-dimensional existence.,The ocean representation would have a depth to it.,And if you hefted those two things,you might find that the relative scale of those is 20 to 1. 
 It turns out that something more than,94 percent of life on earth is aquatic.,That means that us terrestrials occupy a minority.,The problem we have in believing that,is -- you just have to give up this notion,that this Earth was created for us.,Because its a problem we have.,If this is an ocean planet,and we only have a small minority of this planet,,it just interferes with a lot of what humanity thinks. 
 Okay. Let me criticize this thing.,Im not talking about James Cameron --,although I could, but I wont.,You really do have to go and see his latest film,,"Aliens of the Deep." Its incredible.,It features two of these deep rovers,,and I can criticize them because these sweet things are mine.,This, I think, represents one of the most beautiful,classic submersibles built.,If you look at that sub, youll see a sphere.,This is an acryclic sphere.,It generates all of the buoyancy,,all of the payload for the craft,,and the batteries are down here hanging underneath,,exactly like a balloon.,This is the envelope, and this is the gondola, the payload.,Also coming up later for criticism are these massive lights.,And this one actually carries two great manipulators.,It actually is a very good working sub --,thats what it was designed for.,The problem with it is --,and the reason I will never build another one like it --,is that this is a product of two-dimensional thinking.,Its what we humans do when we go in the ocean as engineers;,we take all our terrestrial hang-ups,,all our constraints -- importantly,,these two-dimensional constraints that we have,,and theyre so constrained we dont even understand it --,and we take them underwater.,You notice that Jim Cameron is sitting in a seat.,A seat works in a two-dimensional world,,where gravity blasts down on that seat, OK?,And in a two-dimensional world,,we do know about the third dimension,but we dont use it because to go up,requires an awful lot of energy against gravity.,And then our mothers tell us,,"Careful you dont fall down" -- because youll fall over. 
 Now, go into the real atmosphere of this planet.,This planet has an inner atmosphere of water;,its its inner atmosphere. It has two atmospheres --,a lesser, outer gaseous atmosphere, a lighter one.,Most of life on earth is in that inner atmosphere.,And that life enjoys a three-dimensional existence,,which is alien to us.,Fish do not sit in seats.,(Laughter),They dont. Their mothers dont say to little baby fish,,"Careful you dont fall over.",They dont fall over. They dont fall.,They live in a three-dimensional world,where there is no difference in energy,between going this way, that way, that way or that way.,Its truly a three-dimensional space.,And were only just beginning to grasp it.,I dont know of any other submersible,,or even remote, that just takes advantage,that this is a three-dimensional space. 
 This is the way we should be going into the oceans.,This is a three-dimensional machine.,What we need to do is go down into the ocean with the freedom of the animals,,and move in this three-dimensional space.,OK, this is good stuff.,This is mans first attempt at flying underwater.,Right now, Im just coming down on this gorgeous, big, giant manta ray.,She has twice the wingspan that I do.,There Im coming; she sees me.,And just notice how she rolls under and turns;,she doesnt sit there and try and blow air into a tank,and kind of flow up or sink down -- she just rolls.,And the craft that Im in --,this hasnt been shown before.,Chris asked us to show stuff that hasnt been shown before.,I wanted you to notice,that she actually turned to come back up.,There I am; I see her coming back,,coming up underneath me.,I put reverse thrust and I try and pull gently down.,Im trying to do everything very gently.,We spent about three hours together and shes beginning to trust me.,And this ballet is controlled by this lady here.,She gets about that close and then she pulls away.,So now I try and go after her, but Im practicing flying.,This is the first flying machine. This was the first prototype.,This was a fly by wire. It has wings.,Therere no silly buoyancy tanks --,its permanently, positively buoyant.,And then by moving through the water,its able to take that control.,Now, look at that; look, its -- she just blew me away.,She just rolled right away from underneath.,Really thats the only real dive Ive ever made in this machine. 
 It took 10 years to build.,But this lady here taught me, hah, taught me so much.,We just learned so much in three hours in the water there.,I just had to go and build another machine.,But look here. Instead of blowing tanks,and coming up slowly without thinking about it,,its a little bit of back pressure,,and that sub just comes straight back up out of the water. 
 This is an internal Sony camera. Thank you, Sony.,I dont really look that ugly,,but the camera is so close that its just distorted.,Now, there she goes, right overhead.,This is a wide-angle camera.,Shes just a few inches off the top of my head.,"Aah, ha, oh, he just crossed over the top of my head about,,oh, I dont know, just so close.",I come back up, not for air.,"This is an incredible encounter with a manta. Im speechless.,Weve been just feet apart. Im going back down now.",Okay, can we cut that? Lights back up please.,(Applause) 
 Trying to fly and keep up with that animal --,it wasnt the lack of maneuverability that we had.,It was the fact she was going so slow.,I actually designed that to move faster through the water,because I thought that was the thing,that we needed to do: to move fast and get range.,But after that encounter I really did want to go back with that animal and dance.,She wanted to dance.,And so what we needed to do was increase the wing area,so that we just had more grip, develop higher forces. 
 So the sub that was outside last year -- this is the one.,You see the larger wing area here.,Also, clearly, it was such a powerful thing,,we wanted to try and bring other people,but we couldn't figure out how to do it.,So we opened the worlds first flight school.,The rational for the worlds first flight school,goes something like: when the coastguards come up to me and say --,they used to leave us alone when we were diving,these goofy little spherical things,,but when we started flying around,in underwater jet fighters they got a little nervous --,they would come up and say,,"Do you have a license for that?",And then Id put my sunglasses on, the beard,that would all sprout out, and I would say,,"I dont need no stinking license.",(Laughter),"I write these stinking license," which I do.,So Bob Gelfond's around here --,but somebody in the audience here has license number 20.,Theyre one of the first subsea aviators.,So weve run two flight schools.,Where the hell that goes, I dont know, but its a lot of fun.,What comes next in 30 seconds? I cant tell you. 
 But the patent for underwater flight --,Karen and I, we were looking at it,,some business partners wanted us to patent it --,we werent sure about that.,Weve decided were just going to let that go.,It just seems wrong to try and patent --,(Applause),-- the freedom for underwater flight.,So anybody who wants to copy us,and come and join us, go for it.,The other thing is that weve got much lower costs.,We developed some other technology,called spider optics, and Craig Ventner asked me,to make an announcement here this morning:,were going to be building a beautiful, little,,small version of this -- unmanned, super deep --,for his boat to go and get back some deep sea DNA stuff.,(Applause),Thank you.Sixty-five million years ago, a very important,and catastrophic event,changed the course of life on land.,And although we know that the land animals I'm going to talk about,are just the scum of the Earth on the land --,the little bits of land floating around -- but they are important to us,because they're sort of in our scale of experience from millimeters to meters.,And these animals disappeared,,and a separate life, mammals,,radiated out to take their place. And so, we know this,in extraordinary detail. And so this is a core,from near Bermuda. We know that the tsunamis, the earthquakes,,and the things that we've experienced,in the entire record of humankind history,can't really quite get around the kind of disaster,that this represented for the Earth. 
 So even before that impact was known,,even before scientists in general came to an agreement,over the theory of evolution,,scientists and natural historians of all kinds of stripes,actually had divided Earth's life's history,into these two episodes:,Mesozoic, the middle life, and the Cenozoic, the recent life.,And as it turns out, it actually corresponds really nicely,with geologic history.,So we have a Mesozoic period,,an age of fragmentation,,and a Cenozoic period, an age of reconnection --,South America to North America, India to Asia.,And so my work, really, is trying to understand,the character of that Mesozoic radiation,compared to the Cenozoic radiation,to see what mysteries we can understand from dinosaurs and from other animals,about what life on drifting continents,really can tell us about evolution. 
 The work immediately begs the question,,"Why didn't they go into the waters?",I mean, certainly mammals did. This is one example.,You can go outside -- see many other examples.,Within five, 10 million years of the bolide impact,we had a whole variety of animals going into the water. Why didn't they do that?,Why didn't they hang around in trees at good size,,and why didn't they burrow?,Why didn't they do all these things, and if they didn't do all these things,,what kinds of animals were in those spaces?,And if there were no animals in those spaces, what does that tell us,about, you know, how evolution works on land?,Really interesting questions. I think a lot of it has to do with body size.,In fact, I think that most of it has to do with body size --,the size you are when you inherit,a vacant ecospace,from whatever natural disaster. 
 Looking at dinosaur evolution,and studying it, digging it up for many years,,I end up looking at the mammal radiation,,and it seems as though everything is quick time, just like technology,,advancing by an order of magnitude.,Dinosaur evolution proceeded at a stately pace,,an order of magnitude slower on any way you want to measure it.,You want to measure it by diversity?,You want to measure it by,the time it took to reach maximum body size?,Yes, they do have larger body size,,but many of them are smaller,,but we're interested in the time it took them to achieve that.,Fifty million years to achieve this maximum body size.,And that is 10 times longer than it took the mammals,to achieve maximum body size,and invade all those habitats. 
 So there's lessons to learn,,and there's lessons to learn from the exception,,the exception that we know very well today from the discoveries we've made,,and many other scholars have made around the world.,This slide was shown before. This is the famous Jurassic bird Archaeopteryx.,We now know this transition is the one time,that dinosaurs actually went below,that body size --,we're going to see where they began in a minute --,and it is the one time that they rapidly,invaded all the habitats,I just told you that dinosaurs weren't in.,They became marine. We now know them today,from the ice caps.,There's burrowing birds.,They inhabit the trees at all body sizes,,and, of course, they inhabit the land. 
 So we were the first to actually name a bird from the famous series,that later exploded onto the pages of Science and Nature.,We called this bird Sinornis. It's a little bit more advanced than Archaeopteryx,,and if you go to different layers, you find things,that are less advanced than Archaeopteryx, and every grade in between,,so that if you find something today, we're usually splitting hairs --,or, more appropriately, feathers -- as to decide whether it's actually,a non-avian or an avian.,It is the greatest transition that we have, actually,,on land from one habitat to another,,bar none,,to understand how a bony,,fairly heavy, kilogram or a couple-of-kilogram animal,could make such a transition.,It is really our greatest -- one of our greatest -- evolutionary sequences. 
 Now, my work began at the beginning.,I thought if I'm going to understand dinosaur evolution,,I'd have to go back to those beds,where they had picked up fragments, go back to a time and a place,where the earliest dinosaurs existed.,I'd like to call for this little video clip,to give you some idea of, sort of, what we face. Normally, we get asked a lot of questions:,"Well, how do you find fossils in areas that look like this?",If we could roll that first video clip.,This is sort of a nice helicopter ride,through those early beds,,and they're located in Northeastern Argentina.,And we're coming over a cliff, and at the top of that cliff,,dinosaurs had basically taken over.,At the bottom of the cliff, we find that they're rare as hens' teeth.,That's where dinosaur origins is to be found: at the bottom of the cliff. 
 You go into an area like this, you get a geologic map,,you get a topographic map,,and the best, most-inspired team you can bring to the area.,And the rest is up to you. You've got to find fossils.,You've got to dig a hole that's usually quite a bit bigger than that,to get it out; you've got to climb those cliffs,and find, really, everything that existed --,not just the dinosaurs, but the entire story. If you're lucky,,and you dig a place like that,,you actually find the ash bed to dig it, and we did.,228 million years old, we found,what really is the most primitive dinosaur:,that's the Ur-dinosaur.,A three-and-a-half foot thing,,beautiful skull, predator,,meat-eater, a two-legged animal.,So, all the other dinosaurs that you know,,or your kids know, at least, on four legs.,This is sort of a look at the skull,,and it's an absolutely fantastic thing about five or six inches long.,It looks rather bird-like because it is.,It's bird-like and hollow.,A predator. Maybe 25 pounds,,or 10 kilograms.,That's where dinosaurs began. That's where the radiation began.,That is 10 times larger,than the mammal radiation, which was a four-legged radiation.,We are extremely dinosaur-like,,and unusual in our two-legged approach to life. 
 Now, if you want to understand what happened,then when the continents broke apart,,and dinosaurs found -- landlubbers, as they are --,found themselves adrift. There's some missing puzzle pieces.,Most of those missing puzzle pieces are southern continents,,because it was those continents that are least explored.,If you want to add to this picture and try and sketch it globally,,you really have to force yourself to go down,to the four corners of the Earth --,Africa, India, Antarctica, Australia --,and start putting together some of these pieces.,I've been to some of those continents, but Africa was,,in the words of Steven Pinker, was a blank slate, largely.,But one with an immense chalkboard in the middle,,with lots of little areas of dinosaur rock,if you could survive an expedition. 
 There's no roads into the Sahara. It's an enormous place.,To be able to excavate,the 80 tons of dinosaurs that we have in the Sahara,and take them out, you really have to put together,an expedition team that can handle the conditions.,Some of them are political. Many of them are physical.,Some of them -- the most important -- are mental.,And you really have to be able to withstand conditions --,you have to drive into the desert,,you will see landscapes in many cases --,you can see from what we've discovered --,that nobody else has ever seen.,And the kinds of teams they bring in?,Well, they're,composed of,people who understand science as adventure with a purpose.,They're usually students who've never seen a desert.,Some of them are more experienced. 
 Your job as a leader -- this is definitely a team sport --,your job as a leader is to try to inspire them,to do more work than they've ever done in their life,under conditions that they can't imagine.,So, 125 degrees is normal.,The ground surface at 150 -- typical.,So, you can't leave your normal metal tools out,because you'll get a first-degree burn if you grab them sometimes.,So, you are finding yourself also in an amazing cultural milieu.,You're really rubbing shoulders,with the world's last great nomadic people.,These are the Tuareg nomads, and they're living their lives,much as they have for centuries.,Your job is to excavate things like this in the foreground,,and make them enter the pages of history.,To do that, you've got to actually transport them,thousands of miles out of the desert. 
 We're talking about Ethiopia, but let's talk about Niger --,or Niger, in our English language -- north of Nigeria --,that's where this photograph was taken.,Basically you're talking about a country that,,when we started working there, did not have container traffic.,You transported the bones out yourself,to the coast of Africa,,onto a boat, if you wanted to get them out of the middle of the Sahara.,That's a 2,000 mile journey.,So enormous excavations and a lot of work,,and out of essentially a partial herd of dinosaurs,that you saw buried there -- 20 tons of material --,we erect Jobaria,,a sauropod dinosaur like we haven't seen on some other continents.,It really is a little bit out of place temporally.,It looks nothing like what we would find,if we dug in contemporary beds in North America.,Here's the animal that was causing it trouble. 
 And, you know, on and on --,a whole menagerie. When you pick up something like this --,and some of you have had the chance to touch it --,this is a piece of history. You're touching something that's 110 million years old.,This is a thumb claw. There it was, moments after it was discovered.,It is an incredible view of life,,and it really began when we began to understand,the depth of time.,It's only been with us for less than a century,,and in that time, that fourth dimension,,when radioactive dating came about, less than a century ago,,and we could actually tell how old some of these things were,,is probably the most profound transformation,,because it changes the way we look at ourselves,and the world dramatically.,When you pick up a piece of history like that,,I think it can transform,kids that are possibly interested in science. 
 That's the animal that thumb claw came from: Suchomimus.,Here's some others.,This is something we found in Morocco, an immense animal.,We prototyped by CAT-scanning the brain out of this animal.,It turns out to have a forebrain,one-fifteenth the size of a human.,This was the cover of Science, because they thought,that humans were more intelligent than these animals,,but we can see by some in our administration,that despite,the enormous advantage in brain volume,some of the attitudes remain the same. Anyway,,smaller raptors.,All the stuff from Jurassic Park that you know of --,all those small animals --,they all come from northern continents.,This is the first skeleton from a southern continent,,and guess what? You start preparing it.,It has no big claw on its hind foot. It doesn't look like a Velociraptor.,It's really a wholly separate radiation.,So what we're trying to piece together here is a story.,It involves flying reptiles like this Pterosaur,that we reconstructed from Africa. 
 Crocodiles, of course,,and that's a nasty one we haven't named yet.,And huge things -- I mean, this is a,lower jaw just laying there in the desert,of this enormous crocodile.,The crocodile is technically called Sarcosuchus.,That's an adult Orinoco crocodile in its jaws.,We had to try and reconstruct this.,We had to actually look at recent crocodiles,to understand how crocodiles scale.,Could I have the second little video clip?,Now, this field is just -- and, of course, science in general -- is just -- adventure.,We had to find and measure,the largest crocodiles living today. 
 Narrator: ... as long as their boat. 
 Man: Look at that set of choppers! Yeah, he's a big one. 
 Narrator: If they can just land it,,this croc will provide useful data,,helping Paul in his quest to understand Sarcosuchus. 
 Man: OK, hand me some more here. Man 2: OK. 
 Narrator: It falls to Paul to cover its eyes. 
 Man: Watch out! Watch out! No, no, no, no. You're going to have to get on the back legs. 
 Man: I got the back legs. 
 Man 2: You have the back legs? No, you have the front legs, my friend.,I've got it. I've got the back legs.,Somebody get the front legs. 
 Paul Sereno: Let's get this tape measure on him. Put it right there.,Wow.,Sixty-five. Wow.,That's a big skull. 
 Narrator: Big, but less than half the size,of supercroc's skull. 
 Man: Enormous. PS: You've got a ... 14-foot croc. 
 Man: I knew it was big. 
 PS: Don't get off. You don't get off, but don't worry about me. 
 Narrator: Paul has his data, so they decide,to release the animal back into the river. 
 PS: Don't get off! Don't get off! Don't get off! 
 Narrator: Paul has never seen a fossil do that. 
 PS: Okay, when I say three, we move.,One, two, three!,Whoa! 
 So -- there were --,(Applause),Well, you know, the -- the fossil record is truly amazing,because it really forces you to look at living animals in a new way.,We proved with those measurements,that crocodiles scaled isometrically.,It depended on the shape of their skull, though,,so we had to actually get those measurements,to be sure that we had reconstructed and could prove to the scientific world,that supercroc in fact is a 40-foot crocodile, probably a male.,Anyway, you find other things, too.,I'm going to lead an expedition to the Sahara,to dig up Africa's largest neolithic site.,We found this last year.,Two hundred skeletons, tools, jewelry. 
 This is a ceremonial disk.,An amazing record of the colonization of the Sahara,5,000 years ago is been sitting out there,waiting for us to go back. So, really exciting.,And then work later is going to take us to Tibet.,Now, we normally think of Tibet as a highland.,It's really an island continent.,It was a precursor to India,,a messenger from Gondwana --,a lost paradise of dinosaurs,isolated for millions of years.,No one's found them. We know where they are,,and we're going to go and get them next year.,They're only between 13 and 14,000 feet,,but if you go in the warm part of the year, it's O.K.,Now, I tried to suture together a dinosaur evolutionary history,so that we can try to understand,some basic patterns of evolution.,I've talked about a few of them. We really need to take that further.,We need to delve into this mass of anatomy,that we've been compiling,to understand where the changes are occurring and what this means.,We can't predict, necessarily, what will happen in evolution,,but we can learn some of the rules of the game,,and that's really what we're trying to do. 
 With regard to the biogeographic question,,the Earth is dividing.,These are all landlubbing animals. There's a couple of choices.,You get divided, and a continent's division,corresponds to a fork in the evolutionary tree,,or you're crafty, and you manage to escape,from one to the other and erase that division,,or you're living peacefully on each side,,and on one side you just go extinct,,and you survive on the other side and create a difference.,And the fourth thing is that you actually did one or the other,of those three things, but the paleontologist never found you.,And you take those four instances,and you realize you have a complex problem.,And so, in addition to digging, I think we have some answers,from the dinosaur record. I think these dinosaurs migrated --,we call it dispersal -- around the globe, with the slightest land bridge.,They did it within two or three degrees of the pole,,to maintain similarity between continents.,But when they were divided, indeed they were divided,,and we do see the continents,carving differences among dinosaurs. 
 But there's one thing that's even more important, and I think that's extinction.,We have downgraded this factor.,It carves up the history of life,,and gives us the differences that we see,in the dinosaur world towards the end,,right before the bolide impact.,The best way to test this is to actually create a model.,So if we move back, this is a two-dimensional typical tree of life.,I want to give you three dimensions.,So you see the tree of life,,but now I've added the dimension of area.,So the tree of life is normally divergence over time.,Now we have divergence over time, but we've created the third dimension of area. 
 This is a computer program,which has three knobs.,We can control those things that we're worried about:,extinction, sampling, dispersal --,going from one area to another.,And ultimately we can control the branching,to mimic what we think the continents were like,,and run it a thousand times, so we can estimate the parameters,,to answer the question whether we are on the mark or not,,at least to know the barriers of the problems. So that's a little bit about the science. 
 Today I'm going to spend the rest of my few minutes up here,talking about the other stuff that I do in Chicago,,which is related to the fact that I never --,and actually, in talking to a lot of TEDsters,,there's a number of you out there -- I don't know that I'd get an answer,honestly, if I asked you to raise your hand,,but there are a number of you out there that started your,scientific, technical, entertainment career,as failures, by society's standards, as failures by schools.,I was one of those. I was failed by my school -- my school failed me.,Who's pointing fingers?,Several teachers nearly killed me.,I found myself in art.,I was a total failure in school, not really headed to graduate high school.,And I went on -- that's my first painting on canvas.,I read a dictionary. I got into college.,I became an artist. O.K., and started drawing.,It became abstract.,I worked up a portfolio, and I was headed to New York.,Sometimes I would see bones when there was a body there.,Something was going on in the background. I headed to New York to a studio.,I took a side trip to the American Museum, and I never recovered. 
 But really it's the same discipline -- they're kindred disciplines.,I mean, is there anything,that is not visualizing what can't be seen,,in terms of discovering this dinosaur bone from a small piece of it,that's out there, or seeing the distortion,that we try to see,as evolutionary distortion in one animal to another?,This is a very extraordinarily visual.,I give you a human face because you're experts at that.,It takes us years to understand how to do that with dinosaurs.,They're really kindred disciplines.,But what we're trying to create in Chicago,is a way to get,,collect together, those students,who are least represented in our science and technology spheres.,We all know, and there's been several allusions to it,,that we are failing in our ability to produce,enough scientists, engineers and technicians. 
 We've known that for a long time. We've gone through the Sputnik phase,,and now, as you see the increase,in the pace of what we're doing,,it becomes even more prominent. nWhere are all these people going to come from?,And a more general question for our society is,,what's going to happen to all the rest that are left behind?,What about all the kids like me that were in school --,kids like some of you out there --,that were in school and didn't get a chance and will never get a chance,to participate in science and technology? 
 Those are the questions I ask. And we talk about Ethiopia, and it's very important.,Niger is equally important, and I'm trying desperately,to do something in Niger.,They have an AIDS problem. I asked --,the U.S. State Department asked the government recently,,What do you want to do? And they gave them two problems.,Dinosaurs was one of them.,Give us a museum of dinosaurs,,and we will attract tourists, which is our number two industry.,And I hope to God the United States government, me, or TED,,or somebody helps us do that, because that would be an incredible thing for their country.,But when we look back at our own country, we're looking back at our cities,,the cities where most of you come from -- certainly the city I come from --,there's legions of kids out there,like these.,And the question is -- and we started to address this question for centuries --,as to how we get these kids involved in science. 
 We've started in Chicago,an organization -- a non-profit organization --,called Project Exploration.,These are two kids from Project Exploration.,We met them in their early stages in high school. They were --,failing to poor students,,and they are now -- one at the University of Chicago, another in Illinois.,We've got students at Harvard. We're six years old.,And we created a track record.,Because when you go out there as a scholar, and you try to find out longitudinal studies,,track records like that, there essentially are very few, if none.,So, we've created an incredible track record of 100 percent graduation,,90 percent going to college, many first-generation,,90 percent of those choosing science as a career.,It's an impressive track record, and so we look back and we say,,well, we didn't really exactly work this out theoretically from the start,,but when we look back, there are theoretical movements in science education. 
 It's gone through science as an inquiry,,which was a big advance,,and Dewey back at Chicago --,you learn by doing.,To -- you learn by envisioning yourself,as a scientist,,and then you learn to envision yourself as a scientist.,The next step is to learn the capability,to make yourself a scientist.,You have to have those steps. If you have --,It's easy to get kids interested in science.,It's hard to get them to envision themselves as a scientist,,which involves standing up in front of people like we're doing here at this symposium,and presenting something as a knowledgeable person,,and then seeing yourself in the role as a scientist,and giving yourself the tools to pursue that. 
 And so, that's what we're going to do. We're planning a permanent home in Chicago.,We have lots of ideas, but I guarantee you this one thing --,and I've talked to some people here at TED --,it's not going to look like anything you've seen before.,It's going to be part-school, part-museum hall,,part-conservatory, part-zoo,,and part of an answer to the problem,of how you interest kids in science.,Thank you very much.People love their automobiles.,They allow us to gonwhere we want to when we want to.,They're a form of entertainment,,they're a form of art,,a pride of ownership.,Songs are written about cars.,Prince wrote a great song:n"Little Red Corvette.",He didn't write "Little Red LaptopnComputer" or "Little Red Dirt Devil.",He wrote about a car.,One of my favorites has always been:,"Make Love to Your Man in a Chevy Van,",because that was my vehiclenwhen I was in college. 
 The fact is, when we donour market research around the world,,we see there's a nearly universalnaspiration on the part of people,to own an automobile --,750 million peoplenin the world today own a car.,And you say, boy, that's a lot.,But you know what?,That's just 12 percent of the population.,We really have to ask the question:,Can the world sustainnthat number of automobiles?,And if you look at projectionsnover the next 10 to 15 to 20 years,,it looks like the worldncar park could grow,to on the order of 1.1 billion vehicles.,If you park those end to endnand wrap them around the Earth,,that would stretchnaround the Earth 125 times. 
 Now, we've made great progressnwith automobile technology,over the last 100 years.,Cars are dramatically cleaner,ndramatically safer, more efficient,and radically more affordablenthan they were 100 years ago.,But the fact remains:,the fundamental DNA of the automobilenhas stayed pretty much the same.,If we were to reinvent the automobilentoday, rather than 100 years ago,,knowing what we know about the issuesnassociated with our product,and about the technologiesnthat exist today,,what would we do? 
 We wanted somethingnthat was really affordable.,The fuel cell looked great:,one-tenth as many moving parts,,a fuel-cell propulsion systemnas an internal combustion engine,,and it emits just water.,And we wanted to takenadvantage of Moore's Law,with electronic controls and software,,and we absolutely wantednour car to be connected.,So we embarked upon the reinventionnaround an electrochemical engine,,the fuel cell,,and hydrogen as the energy carrier.,First was Autonomy.,Autonomy really set the visionnfor where we wanted to head.,We embodied all of the key componentsnof a fuel-cell propulsion system.,We then had Autonomyndrivable with Hy-Wire,,and we showed Hy-Wire herenat this conference last year.,Hy-Wire is the world's firstndrivable fuel cell,,and we have followednup that now with Sequel.,And Sequel truly is a real car.,So if we could run the video -- 
 (Futuristic music) 
 [Reinventing the Automobile] 
 (Video) It truly is my great pleasurento introduce Sequel. 
 [Acceleration] 
 [Cruising] 
 [Steering] 
 [Braking] 
 But the real key questionnI'm sure that's on your mind:,Where is the hydrogen going to come from?,And secondly, when are these kindsnof cars going to be available?,So let me talk about hydrogen first.,The beauty of hydrogen is it can comenfrom so many different sources:,it can come from fossil fuels,,it can come from any waynthat you can create electricity,,including renewables.,And it can come from biofuels.,And that's quite exciting.,The vision here is to have each localncommunity play to its natural strength,in creating the hydrogen.,A lot of hydrogen is producedntoday in the world.,It's produced to getnsulfur out of gasoline --,which I find is somewhat ironic.,It's produced in the fertilizer industry;,it's produced in the chemicalnmanufacturing industry.,That hydrogen is being made,because there's a goodnbusiness reason for its use.,But it tells us that we knownhow to create it,,we know how to create it cost-effectively,,we know how to handle it safely. 
 We did an analysis,where you would havena station in each city,with each of the 100 largest citiesnin the United States,,and located the stations,so you'd be no more than two milesnfrom a station at any time.,We put one every 25 miles on the freeway,,and it turns out that translatesninto about 12,000 stations.,And at a million dollars each,nthat would be about 12 billion dollars.,That's a lot of money.,But if you built the Alaskannpipeline today,,that's half of what the Alaskannpipeline would cost.,But the real exciting visionnthat we see, truly, is home refueling,,much like recharging your laptopnor recharging your cell phone.,So we're pretty excitednabout the future of hydrogen.,We think it's a question of not whether,nbut a question of when. 
 What we've targeted for ourselves --,and we're making great progressntoward this goal --,is to have a propulsion systemnbased on hydrogen and fuel cells,,designed and validated,,that can go head-to-headnwith the internal combustion engine.,We're talking about obsoletingnthe internal combustion engine,,and doing it in termsnof affordability at scale volumes,,its performance and its durability.,So that's what we're driving to for 2010.,We haven't seen anything yetnin our development work,that says that isn't possible.,We actually think the futurenis going to be event-driven.,So since we can't predict the future,,we want to spend a lot of our timentrying to create that future. 
 I'm very, very intrigued,by the fact that our cars and trucksnsit idle 90 percent of the time:,they're parked all around us.,They're usually parked within 100 feetnof the people that own them.,Now, if you take the power-generatingncapability of an automobile,and you compare that to the electric gridnin the United States,,it turns out that the powernin four percent of the automobiles,equals that of the electricngrid of the US.,That's a huge power-generating capability,,a mobile power-generating capability.,And hydrogen and fuel cellsngive us that opportunity,to actually use our cars and trucksnwhen they're parked,to generate electricity for the grid. 
 We talked about swarm networks earlier.,Talk about the ultimate swarm --nhaving all of the processors,and all of the carsnwhen they're sitting idle,being part of a global gridnfor computing capability.,We find that premise quite exciting.,The automobile becomes,nthen, an appliance --,not in a commodity sense,,but an appliance, mobile power,nmobile platform,for information and computingnand communication,,as well as a form of transportation. 
 And the key to all of thisnis to make it affordable,,to make it exciting,,to get it on a pathway wherenthere's a way to make money doing it.,And again, this is a prettynbig march to take here.,A lot of people say:,How do you sleep at night,when you're wrestling with a problemnof that magnitude?,I tell them I sleep like a baby:nI wake up crying every two hours. 
 (Laughter) 
 Actually, the themenof this conference, I think,,has hit on one of the major keysnto pull that off,,and that's relationshipsnand working together.,Thank you very much. 
 (Applause) 
 Chris Anderson: Larry, Larry -- wait,nwait, wait. Larry, wait one sec.,I've got so many questionsnI could ask you.,I just want to ask one.,You know, I could be wrong about this,,but my sense is thatnin the public mind today,,GM is not viewed as as seriousnabout some of these environmental ideas,as some of your Japanesencompetitors, maybe even as Ford.,Are you serious about it,,and not just, you know,nwhen the consumers want it,,when the regulators force usnto do it, we will go there?,Will you guys really trynand show leadership on this? 
 Larry Burns: Absolutely.nWe're absolutely serious.,We're into thisnover a billion dollars already,,so I would hope peoplenwould think we're serious,when we're spending that kind of money.,And secondly, it's a fundamentalnbusiness proposition.,I'll be honest with you;,we're into it for businessngrowth opportunities.,We can't grow our businessnunless we solve these problems.,The growth of the auto industrynwill be capped by sustainability issues,if we don't solve the problems.,And there's a simple principlenof strategy that says:,Do unto yourselfnbefore others do unto you.,If we can see this possiblenfuture, others can, too.,And we want to be the first onento create it, Chris.Of the five senses, vision is the onenthat I appreciate the most,,and it's the one that I cannleast take for granted.,I think this is partially duento my father, who was blind.,It was a fact that he didn't makenmuch of a fuss about, usually.,One time in Nova Scotia, when we wentnto see a total eclipse of the sun -- 
 (Laughter) 
 Yeah, same one as in the Carly Simon song,,which may or may not refernto James Taylor, Warren Beatty,or Mick Jagger; we're not really sure.,They handed out these dark plastic viewers,that allowed us to lookndirectly at the sun,without damaging our eyes.,But Dad got really scared;nhe didn't want us doing that.,He wanted us instead to usenthese cheap cardboard viewers,,so that there was no chance at allnthat our eyes would be damaged.,I thought this wasna little strange at the time. 
 What I didn't know at the time,was that my father had actuallynbeen born with perfect eyesight.,When he and his sister Marthanwere just very little,,their mom took them outnto see a total eclipse --,or actually, a solar eclipse --,and not long after that, both of themnstarted losing their eyesight.,Decades later, it turned outnthat the source of their blindness,was most likely some sortnof bacterial infection.,As near as we can tell,nit had nothing whatsoever to do,with that solar eclipse,,but by then my grandmothernhad already gone to her grave,thinking it was her fault. 
 So, Dad graduated Harvard in 1946,,married my mom,,and bought a housenin Lexington, Massachusetts,,where the first shots were firednagainst the British in 1775,,although we didn't actually hitnany of them until Concord.,He got a job working for Raytheonndesigning guidance systems,,which was part of the Route 128nhigh-tech axis in those days --,so, the equivalentnof Silicon Valley in the '70s.,Dad wasn't a realnmilitaristic kind of guy;,he just felt bad that he wasn't ablento fight in World War II,on account of his handicap,,although they did let him get through,the several-hour-long army physical exam,before they got to the very last test,nwhich was for vision. 
 (Laughter) 
 So Dad started rackingnup all of these patents,and gaining a reputation as a blindngenius, rocket scientist, inventor.,But to us he was just Dad,nand our home life was pretty normal.,As a kid, I watched a lot of television,and had lots of nerdy hobbiesnlike mineralogy and microbiology,and the space programnand a little bit of politics.,I played a lot of chess.,But at the age of 14, a friendngot me interested in comic books,,and I decided that wasnwhat I wanted to do for a living. 
 So, here's my dad:,he's a scientist, he's an engineernand he's a military contractor.,So, he has four kids, right?,One grows up to becomena computer scientist,,one grows up to join the Navy,,one grows up to become an engineer ...,And then there's me:nthe comic book artist. 
 (Laughter) 
 Which, incidentally, makes menthe opposite of Dean Kamen,,because I'm a comic book artist,nson of an inventor,,and he's an inventor,nson of a comic book artist. 
 (Laughter) 
 Right? It's true. 
 (Applause) 
 The funny thing is,nDad had a lot of faith in me.,He had faith in my abilitiesnas a cartoonist,,even though he had no direct evidencenthat I was any good whatsoever;,everything he saw was just a blur.,Now, this gives a real meaningnto the term "blind faith,",which doesn't have the samennegative connotation for me,that it does for other people.,Now, faith in things which cannotnbe seen, which cannot be proved,,is not the sort of faith that I've evernreally related to all that much.,I tend to like science,,where what we see and can ascertainnare the foundation of what we know. 
 But there's a middle ground, too --,a middle ground tread by peoplenlike poor old Charles Babbage,and his steam-driven computersnthat were never built.,Nobody really understoodnwhat it was that he had in mind,except for Ada Lovelace,,and he went to his graventrying to pursue that dream.,Vannevar Bush with his memex --,this idea of all of humannknowledge at your fingertips --,he had this vision.,And I think a lot of people in his day,probably thought he was a bit of a kook.,And, yeah, we can look backnin retrospect and say,,"Yeah, ha-ha, it's all microfilm -- 
 (Laughter) 
 But that's not the point;nhe understood the shape of the future.,So did J.C.R. Licklider and his notionsnfor computer-human interaction.,Same thing: he understoodnthe shape of the future,,even though it was somethingnthat would only be implemented,by people much later.,Or Paul Baran, and his visionnfor packet switching.,Hardly anybody listened to him in his day.,Or even the peoplenwho actually pulled it off,,the people at Bolt, Beraneknand Newman in Boston,,who just would sketch out these structures,of what would eventuallynbecome a worldwide network,,and sketching things on the backnof napkins and on note papers,and arguing over dinnernat Howard Johnson's --,on Route 128 in Lexington, Massachusetts,,just two miles from where I was studyingnthe Queen's Gambit Deferred,and listening to Gladys Knight &amp; The Pips,singing "Midnight Train to Georgia" -- 
 (Laughter) 
 in my dad's big easy chair, you know? 
 So, three types of vision, right?,Vision based on what one cannot see,,the vision of that unseen and unknowable.,The vision of that which has alreadynbeen proven or can be ascertained.,And this third kind, a vision of somethingnwhich can be, which may be,,based on knowledgenbut is, as yet, unproven.,Now, we've seen a lotnof examples of people,who are pursuingnthat sort of vision in science,,but I think it's also truenin the arts, it's true in politics,,it's even true in personal endeavors. 
 What it comes down to, really,nis four basic principles:,learn from everyone;,follow no one;,watch for patterns;,and work like hell.,I think these are the four principlesnthat go into this.,And it's that third one, especially,,where visions of the futurenbegin to manifest themselves.,What's interesting is that this particularnway of looking at the world,,is, I think, only onenof four different ways,that manifest themselvesnin different fields of endeavor.,In comics, I know that it resultsnin sort of a formalist attitude,towards trying to understand how it works.,Then there's another,nmore classical attitude,which embraces beauty and craft;,another one which believesnin the pure transparency of content;,and then another, which emphasizesnthe authenticity of human experience,and honesty and rawness. 
 These are four very different waysnof looking at the world.,I even gave them names:,the classicist, the animist,nthe formalist and iconoclast.,Interestingly, they seemnto correspond more or less,to Jung's four subdivisionsnof human thought.,And they reflect a dichotomynof art and delight,on left and the right;,tradition and revolutionnon the top and the bottom.,And if you go on the diagonal,nyou get content and form,,and then beauty and truth.,And it probably applies just as muchnto music and movies and fine art,,which has nothing whatsoevernto do with vision at all,,or, for that matter, nothing to donwith our conference theme,of "Inspired by Nature,",except to the extentnof the fable of the frog,who gives a ride to the scorpionnon his back to get across the river,because the scorpionnpromises not to sting him,,but the scorpion stings him anywaynand they both die,,but not before the frog asksnhim why, and the scorpion says,,"Because it's my nature.",In that sense, yes. 
 (Laughter) 
 So this was my nature.,The thing was, I saw that the route I took,to discovering this focus in my work,and who I was --,I saw it as just this road to discovery.,Actually, it was just menembracing my nature,,which means that I didn't actually fallnthat far from the tree, after all. 
 So what does a "scientific mind"ndo in the arts?,I started making comics, but I alsonstarted trying to understand them,,almost immediately.,One of the most important thingsnabout comics that I discovered,was that comics are a visual medium,,but they try to embracenall of the senses within it.,So, the different elementsnof comics, like pictures and words,,and the different symbolsnand everything in between,that comics presents,,are all funneled throughnthe single conduit, a vision.,So we have things like resemblance,,where something which resemblesnthe physical world can be abstracted,in a couple of different directions:,abstracted from resemblance,nbut still retaining the complete meaning,,or abstracted awaynfrom both resemblance and meaning,towards the picture plane. 
 Put all these three together,nand you have a nice little map,of the entire boundarynof visual iconography,,which comics can embrace.,And if you move to the rightnyou also get language,,because that's abstractingneven further from resemblance,,but still maintaining meaning.,Vision is called upon to represent sound,and to understandnthe common properties of those two,and their common heritage as well;,also, to try to representnthe texture of sound,to capture its essentialncharacter through visuals.,There's also a balance between the visiblenand the invisible in comics.,Comics is a kind of call and response,,in which the artist gives you somethingnto see within the panels,,and then gives you somethingnto imagine between the panels. 
 Also, another sensenwhich comics' vision represents,,and that's time.,Sequence is a very importantnaspect of comics.,Comics presents a kind of temporal map.,And this temporal map was somethingnthat energizes modern comics,,but I was wonderingnif perhaps it also energizes,other sorts of forms,,and I found some in history.,You can see this same principle operating,in these ancient versionsnof the same idea.,What's happening is,,an art form is collidingnwith a given technology,,whether it's paint on stone,,like the Tomb of Menna the Scribenin ancient Egypt,,or a bas-relief sculpturenrising up a stone column,,or a 200-foot-long embroidery,,or painted deerskin and tree bark,running across 88 accordion-folded pages. 
 What's interesting is,nonce you hit "print" --,and this is from 1450, by the way --,all of the artifacts of modern comicsnstart to present themselves:,rectilinear panel arrangements,,simple line drawings without tone,,and a left-to-right reading sequence.,And within 100 years, you already startnto see word balloons and captions,,and it's really just a hop, skipnand a jump from here to here.,So I wrote a book about this in '93,nbut as I was finishing the book,,I had to do a little bit of typesetting,,and I was tired of goingnto my local copy shop to do it,,so I bought a computer.,And it was just a little thing --,it wasn't good for muchnexcept text entry --,but my father had told menabout Moore's law back in the '70s,,and I knew what was coming.,And so, I kept my eyes peeled,to see if the sortnof changes that happened,when we went from pre-printncomics to print comics,would happen when we went beyond,nto post-print comics. 
 So, one of the first things proposed,was that we could mixnthe visuals of comics,with the sound, motionnand interactivity of the CD-ROMs,being made in those days.,This was even before the Web.,And one of the first things they did was,,they tried to take the comics page as is,and transplant it to monitors,,which was a classic McLuhanesque mistake,of appropriating the shapenof the previous technology,as the content of the new technology.,And so, what they would donis have these comic pages,that resemble print comics pages,,and they would introducenall this sound and motion.,The problem was that if you gonwith this basic idea,that space equals time in comics,,what happens is thatnwhen you introduce sound and motion,,which are temporal phenomenanthat can only be represented through time,,they break with that continuitynof presentation. 
 Interactivity was another thing.,There were hypertext comics,nbut the thing about hypertext,is that everything in hypertextnis either here, not here,,or connected to here;,it's profoundly nonspatial.,The distance from Abraham Lincolnnto a Lincoln penny,to Penny Marshall to the Marshall Plannto "Plan 9" to nine lives:,it's all the same. 
 (Laughter) 
 But in comics,,every aspect of the work,nevery element of the work,,has a spatial relationshipnto every other element at all times. 
 So the question was:,Was there any way to preserventhat spatial relationship,while still taking advantagenof all of the things,that digital had to offer us?,And I found my personal answer for this,in those ancient comicsnthat I was showing you.,Each of them has a singlenunbroken reading line,,whether it's going zigzag across the wallsnor spiraling up a column,or just straight left to right,,or even going in a backwards zigzagnacross those 88 accordion-folded pages,,the same thing is happening;,that is, that the basic ideanthat as you move through space,you move through time,,is being carried outnwithout any compromise,,but there were compromises when print hit.,Adjacent spaces were no longernadjacent moments,,so the basic idea of comicsnwas being broken again and again,and again and again. 
 And I thought, OK, well, if that's true,,is there any way,nwhen we go beyond today's print,,to somehow bring that back?,Now, the monitor is just as limitednas the page, technically, right?,It's a different shape,nbut other than that,,it's the same basic limitation.,But that's only if you looknat the monitor as a page,,but not if you looknat the monitor as a window. 
 And that's what I propose,,that perhaps we could createnthese comics on an infinite canvas,,along the X axis and the Y axis,and staircases.,We could do circular narrativesnthat were literally circular.,We could do a turn in a storynthat was literally a turn.,Parallel narrativesncould be literally parallel.,X, Y and also Z.,So I had all these notions.,This was back in the late '90s,,and other people in my businessnthought I was pretty crazy,,but a lot of people then went onnand actually did it.,I'm going to show you a couple now. 
 This was an early collage comicnby a fellow named Jasen Lex.,And notice what's going on here.,What I'm searching fornis a durable mutation --,that's what all of us are searching for.,As media head into this new era,,we are looking for mutationsnthat are durable,,that have some sort of staying power.,Now, we're taking this basic ideanof presenting comics in a visual medium,,and we're carrying it through all the waynfrom beginning to end.,That's that entire comic you just saw,nup on the screen right now.,But even though we're only experiencing itnone piece at a time,,that's just wherenthe technology is right now.,As the technology evolves,,as you get full immersivendisplays and whatnot,,this sort of thingnwill only grow; it will adapt.,It will adapt to its environment;nit's a durable mutation. 
 Here's another one.,This is by Drew Weing; this is called,"'Pup' Ponders the Heat Deathnof the Universe.",See what's going on here,as we draw these storiesnon an infinite canvas,is you're creating a more pure expressionnof what this medium is all about.,We'll go by this a little quickly.nYou get the idea.,I just want to get to the last panel. 
 [Cat 1: Pup! Earth to Pup!nCat 2: Come play baseball with us!] 
 (Laughter) 
 [Pup: Did either of you realize,that eventually the universenwill be nothing but a thin, cold gas,spread across infinite, lonely space?] 
 [Cat 1: Oh ...nCat 2: We'd better hurry, then!] 
 (Laughter) 
 Just one more.,Talk about your infinite canvas.,It's by a guy namednDaniel Merlin Goodbrey, in Britain. 
 Why is this important?,I think this is important because media --,all media --,provide us a window back into our world.,Now, it could be that motion picturesnand eventually, virtual reality,,or something equivalent to it,nsome sort of immersive display,,is going to provide usnwith our most efficient escape,from the world that we're in.,That's why most people turnnto storytelling, to escape.,But media provides us with a windownback into the world we live in.,And when media evolve,so that the identity of the medianbecomes increasingly unique --,because what you're looking atnis comics cubed,,you're looking at comicsnthat are more comics-like,than they've ever been before --,when that happens, you providenpeople with multiple ways,of reentering the worldnthrough different windows.,And when you do that, it allows themnto triangulate the world they live in,and see its shape.,That's why I think this is important.,One of many reasons,nbut I've got to go now.,Thank you for having me.I am going to be talking about secrets.,Obviously the best way to divulge a secret,is to tell someone to not say anything about it.,(Laughter),Secrets. I'm using PowerPoint this year,just because, you know, I'm into the TED thing.,(Laughter),And when you use these things you don't have to go like that.,You just press it.,(Laughter),Oh, man. Um, yes.,(Laughter),Yes. I'm sure! Just change it!,(Laughter),Is Bill Gates here?,Change it! Come on! What?,(Laughter),Ah! Okay.,That's not my slides, but it's okay.,(Laughter) 
 As you can see, these are all maps.,And maps are important devices for transferring information,,especially if you have human cognitive ability.,We can see that all formulas are really maps.,Now, as humans, we make maps of places,that we seldom even go,,which seems a little wasteful of time. 
 This, of course, is a map of the moon.,There're some very delightful names.,Tranquilacalitis, [unclear]. My favorite is Frigoris.,What are these people thinking? Frigoris?,What the Frigoris you doing? Names are important.,Frigoris? This is the Moon. People could live there one day.,I'll meet you at Frigoris. No. I don't think so.,(Laughter) 
 There we see Mars, again with various names.,And this is all done, by the way,,by the International Astronomical Union.,This is an actual group of people,that sit around naming planetary objects.,This is from their actual book.,These are some of the names that they have chosen, ladies and gentlemen. 
 I'll go through a little of them. Bolotnitsa.,That, of course, is the Slavic swamp mermaid.,(Laughter),Now I think the whole concept of a mermaid,doesn't really blend into the swamp feel.,(Laughter),"Oh look! Mermaid come out of swamp. Oh boy!,It's time for Bolotnitsa!",(Laughter) 
 Djabran Fluctus.,If that don't flow off the tongue, what does?,(Laughter),I mean kids are studying this stuff,and they've got the word "fluctus" up there. That's wrong.,(Laughter),One dyslexic kid and he could be ruining his life.,(Laughter),"It fluctus up, Mama." 
 Hikuleo Fluctus.,That's a little more flowing. Hikuleo,sounds like a kind of a Leonardo DiCaprio,17 syllable thing.,And that's the Tonga underworld. 
 And one of my favorites is the Itoki Fluctus,,who is the Nicaraguan goddess of insects, stars, and planets.,Now, if you're a goddess of stars and planets,wouldn't you relegate insects to somebody else?,(Laughter),"No, no, really, I'm so busy with the stars.,Would you mind taking the insects? Thank you darling.,Oh take the spiders too. I know they're not insects, but I don't care.,Monkeys, chimps, just get rid of the hairy creatures.",(Laughter) 
 Now, we're going to be going to Mars one day. And when we do,,it's going to be unfair for the people that are living there,to have to live with these ridiculous names.,So, you'll be on Mars, and you're at,Hellespointica Depressio,which has got to be a really "up" place.,(Laughter) 
 Yeah, I'm at the Depressio, and I want to get over to Amazonis,so I plug it into the Mars map,,and click the button and there's my directions.,I go to Chrysokeras.,(Laughter) Left to the Thymiamata.,Then to Niliacus Lacus,,which is not a bad name.,Niliacus Lacus, try to get the practice, slick-a-tick-a-bacus.,That's a cool name. I will say that.,So, I hold back a little of my venom,for these astronomical misnomers. 
 And then of course Arnon to Thoth.,And of course there will be advertisements.,This is from their rule book, the International Astronomical Union.,And you know they're international because,they put it "en Francais" as well.,L'Union Astronomique Internationale,,for those of you who don't speak French.,I thought I'd translate for you. 
 From the rulebook: Nomenclature is a tool.,The first consideration, make it clear, simple and unambiguous.,And I think that Djabran Fluctus,,that fits that mode.,(Laughter),That's simple, the goddess of goats, very simple.,Djabran Fluctus.,"Now, Frank is this clear to you, Djabran Fluctus?","Yeah, that's the goat goddess right? The Abacazanian?,(Laughter),It's clear to me.","Listen, I'm going back to the swamp mermaid. Can you call me in a little while?",(Laughter) 
 Also, from the actual document,I highlighted a part I thought may be of interest.,Anyone can suggest changing a name.,So, I look to you, fellow member of the Earth community.,We've got to change this stuff up fast.,So, these are actual names of people that work there.,I did some more investigation.,These are more people working for this group.,And, as you can see, they don't use their first names.,(Laughter),These are people naming planets, and they won't use their first names.,Something is askew here.,(Laughter),Is it because his name is really Jupiter Blunck?,(Laughter),Is that Ganymede Andromeda Burba?,(Laughter),Is that Mars Ya Marov?,I don't know. But it's investigative material, no doubt. 
 There are some mapping people who do use their names.,Witness please, Eugene Shoemaker,,who, diligently, from a young boy,decided he wanted to make maps of celestial bodies.,Must have been a very interesting day in the Shoemaker house.,"Mom, I want to make maps.","That's wonderful Eugene. You could make maps of Toronto.","No, I want to make maps of planets.","Yeah, go to your room.",(Laughter) 
 Martians, Venusians, Jovians.,We have names for places where people don't exist.,That seems a little silly to me.,There are no Jovians. 
 Getting back to my premise, I used stamps, by the way,,because you don't have to pay anybody for the rights.,(Laughter),(Applause),There is obviously Einstein, Niels Bohr,,de Fermat's last theorem, and I'm not sure whether that's James Coburn,or Richard Harris.,(Laughter),It's definitely one of the two. I'm not really clear which one. 
 But obviously the point is that numbers are maps.,And within numbers, is there an underlying secret to the universe?,That is the premise of this particular presentation.,By the way, that's a natural picture of Saturn,,no adjustments. I mean that's just beautiful.,So beautiful that I will even give up a laugh,to explain my love of this particular planet,,and the day Saturday, named after it, wonderfully. 
 So, formulas relate number to form.,That's Euler, his formula,was one of the inspirations that lead to the beginning of string theory,which is kind of cool, not that funny, but it is cool.,(Laughter),He was also famous for having no body.,(Laughter),Which a lot of you are like, "How did he figure that out?",He's got no body, no man, just a head floating high.,Here comes Euler.,(Laughter) 
 And that's an icosahedron,,which is one of the five sacred solids, very important shapes.,You see the icosahedron again.,The dodecahedron, it's dual.,There is a dodecahedron which I had to do in my room last night.,The five sacred solids, as you can see there.,Which is not to be confused with the five sacred salads.,(Laughter),Blue cheese, ranch, oil and vinegar, thousand islands and house.,I suggest the house. 
 The reality, now here is something important.,What's important about this is,these shapes are duals of each other.,And you can see how the icosahedron,withdraws into the dodecahedron,and then they just merge into each other.,So, the whole concept of branes in the universe,,if the universe is shaped like a dodecahedron,this is a very good map of what could possibly be.,And that is, of course, what we are here to talk about. 
 What a coincidence!,October 9th, in France, Jean-Pierre Luminet,said that the universe is probably shaped like a dodecahedron,,based on information that they got from this probe.,This would be a normal wave pattern.,But what they're seeing, way out there in the far reaches,of the microwave background,,is this kind of odd undulation.,It doesn't plug in to what they suspected a flat universe would be. 
 So, you can kind of get an idea from this,extrapolating that back under this huge picture,,so we get this idea of what the primal universe looked like.,And judging from this, it looks a little like a cheeseburger.,(Laughter),So, I'm thinking the universe is either a dodecahedron or a cheeseburger.,And for me, that's a win-win.,Everybody goes, I'm happy.,(Laughter),Better really hurry up. 
 I just threw this in because,as important as all of our intellectual abilities are,,without heart and without love it's just -- it's all meaningless.,And that, to me, is really beautiful.,(Laughter),Except for that creepy guy in the background.,(Laughter) 
 Getting back to the point of my particular presentation,,Kepler, one of my great heroes,,who realized that these five solids, which I spoke of earlier,,were related somehow to the planets,,but he couldn't prove it. It freaked him out.,But it did lead to Newton discovering gravity.,So, maps of things leading to organized understandings,of the universe in which we emerge. 
 Now this is Isaac from a Vietnamese stamp.,(Laughter),I am not suggesting at all that my Vietnamese brothers and sisters,could maybe use a little art class here and there. But ...,(Laughter),that's not a good picture.,(Laughter),Not a good picture. Now, my friends in the island of Nevis,are a little better. Look at that! That's Isaac Newton.,That guy is rockin'.,(Laughter),What a handsome cat. 
 Once again, Nicaragua let me down.,(Laughter),And Copernicus looks like Johnny Carson, which is really weird.,(Laughter),I don't get that at all.,Once again, these guys rock it out.,Isaac is kickin' ass. Man, he looks like a rock star.,This is freaky is a major way.,This is Sierra Leone.,They got little babies in there, floating in there.,(Laughter) 
 Man. I don't really need to comment on this.,But I didn't know that Isaac Newton was in the Moody Blues. Did you?,(Laughter),When did this happen?,(Laughter),It's a different kind of course. And they've got five apples?,I mean these guys are extrapolating in realms,that are not necessarily valid.,Although five is a good number, of course. 
 Ecuador, my friend Kepler,,as you can see, they call him Juan.,(Laughter),Juan? No! Johannes, not Juan.,It wasn't Carlos Chaplain. It's wrong.,(Laughter) 
 Ren Descartes, of course. Once again,these Grenada people, this is like way too sick,for anybody's imagination.,He's all murky. There is little kids leaning on his leg,,little ghosts flying around. We gotta clean this stuff up,fast, ladies and gentlemen.,(Laughter) 
 This is, of course, the Cartesian coordinates.,Once again, that's Sierra Leone.,This is again, indicating how numbers,relate to space relate to form, maps of the universe.,Because that's why we're here, really, I think to figure stuff out and to love each other. 
 Descartes. (Laughter),Before the horse. (Laughter),Now, Monaco took Descartes, and just flipped him around.,Now, Monaco is problematic for me, and I'll show you why.,Here is a map. All they have is a casino on it.,(Laughter),And why Franklin Delano Roosevelt is on their map,I don't even want to hazard a guess.,But I'd say he'd been to Hellespointica Depressio recently.,(Laughter) 
 This is the flag of Monaco. Ladies and gentlemen,,the flag of Indonesia. Please examine.,(Laughter),(Applause),Not sure how this came to be, but it's not right.,In Monaco, "No, what are you talking about?,They are so different.,Look, ours is more red, it's longer.,They stole our flag! They stole our flag!",(Laughter) 
 Bode's law wasn't even his law. It was a guy named Titus.,And the reason I just bring this up because it is a law that doesn't really work.,That's Jude Law and some of his films recently didn't work.,(Laughter),Just a correlation that indicates how things are misinterpreted. 
 And I wonder if the photographer said, "Okay, Jude,,could you touch your tooth? That's good.",Just a tip, if you're being photographed,for press pictures, don't touch your teeth.,(Laughter) 
 Prime numbers, Gauss, one of my favorites.,Golden section, I've been obsessed with this thing,since before I was born.,I know that scares a lot of you,,but that was my purpose entirely.,There we can see Fibonacci numbers related to the Golden Section,,because Fibonacci and Golden Section,relate to the unfolding of the measured meter of matter, as I refer to it.,If Fibonacci had been on Paxil,,(Laughter),that would be the Fibonacci series.,"Ten milligram, 20 milligram.","Leonardo, dinner's ready, put down those books and take your pills.","Yes, Mama.",(Laughter) 
 Alright where is this going? That's a good question.,Here is the premise that I began 27 years ago.,If numbers can express,the laws of this incredible universe that we live,,I reason, through some sort of reverse engineering,,we could extrapolate from them,some basic structural element of this universe.,And that's what I did. Twenty-seven years ago,I started working on this. 
 And I tried to build a particle accelerator.,(Laughter),And that didn't work out well.,So, then I thought a calculator is a metaphor.,I can just divide numbers, that's like atom smashing.,That's what I did. That's how I found Moleeds.,Moleeds are what I believe,the thing that will allow string theory to be proved.,They are the nodes on the string,,patterns and relationships, 27, 37.,That was the first chart I came up with. 
 You can see, even if you don't go for the numbers,,the beauty of the symmetry.,The numbers from one to 36, divided into six groups.,Symmetry, pairs.,Every top adds up to 37.,Bottom, all 74.,There is so many intricate relationships that I'm not going to go there now,,because you would say, "Hey, go back to the Fluctus part.",(Laughter) 
 Circle of Fifths, acoustic harmony, geometric symmetry.,I knew those two were related.,Once again, the Cartesian kind of cross-over.,So, I said if I'm going to put a circle,,see what kind of patterns I get, boom, the Red System.,Look at that. You can't just make this stuff up, ladies and gentlemen.,(Laughter),You can't just go around going, "Oh, I'm going to put some triangles in a circle,and they're going to be symmetrical. And they're all going to add up,,and it's going to be, oh yeah, I figured that out." 
 This is beyond anything anybody could just make up.,There is the Orange System.,(Laughter),And you'll see over here, these are multiples of the number 27.,And they recapitulate that shape,,even though that's a circle of nine and that's a circle of 36. It's nuts.,(Laughter),That's the Green System. It all folds in half,on the Green System, right between 18 and 19.,The Blue System. The Violet. It's all there.,(Laughter),Look at that! I mean you cannot make that stuff up.,(Laughter),That just doesn't fall out of a tree, ladies and gentlemen.,Twenty-seven years of my life!,(Laughter),And I'm presenting it here at TED. Why?,Because this is the place if aliens land, I hope they come here.,(Laughter),"We are going to destroy the Earth. Hmmm ... maybe not.",(Laughter) 
 In this last year I have found these subsequent systems,which allow for the mathematic possibilities,of the Calabi-Yau manifolds,in a way that doesn't necessitate these little hidden dimensions.,Which works mathematically, but it just doesn't seem God-like to me.,It just seems like it's not sexy and elegant, it's hidden.,I don't want hidden, I want to see it.,(Laughter) 
 I found other pairs all have symmetry,,even though, unlike the master one, their symmetry is split.,Unbelievable. This is like crazy.,Am I the only one that sees this?,(Laughter),You know, I didn't just draw this in a day, by the way.,You know, try making some charts like this at home.,You gotta be accurate! There's measurement involved, increments.,These are maps, by the way.,Not stamps, but one day.,(Laughter) 
 Okay, I'm getting to the punch. Golden Ratio, it's crazy.,And look at this, built within it is the Golden Ratio.,I start looking at that, and look at them again.,They start looking like planets.,I go to JPL.,I look at the orbits of the planets.,I find 18 examples of it in our solar system.,I never told anybody. This is the first thing. This could be history.,(Laughter),Kepler was right.,(Laughter),Eighteen and 19, the middle of the Moleeds, 0.618 is the golden section.,Multiply them together, 18.618 x 19.618 is 365.247.,Which is .005 different from the number of days in a year. 
 Hey, you can't make this up.,(Laughter),Thank you very much.,(Applause),Thank you.,(Applause),Thank you.,(Applause)How do groups get anything done? Right?,How do you organize a group of individuals,so that the output of the group,is something coherent and of lasting value,,instead of just being chaos?,And the economic framing of that problem,is called coordination costs.,And a coordination cost is essentially all of the financial,or institutional difficulties in arranging group output.,And we've had a classic answer for coordination costs,,which is, if you want to coordinate the work of a group of people,,you start an institution, right? You raise some resources.,You found something. It can be private or public.,It can be for profit or not profit. It can be large or small.,But you get these resources together.,You found an institution, and you use the institution,to coordinate the activities of the group. 
 More recently, because the cost of letting groups,communicate with each other has fallen through the floor --,and communication costs are one of the big,inputs to coordination -- there has been a second answer,,which is to put the cooperation into the infrastructure,,to design systems that coordinate the output,of the group as a by-product of the operating of the system,,without regard to institutional models.,So, that's what I want to talk about today.,I'm going to illustrate it with some fairly concrete examples,,but always pointing to the broader themes. 
 So, I'm going to start by trying to answer a question,that I know each of you will have asked yourself at some point or other,,and which the Internet is purpose-built to answer,,which is, where can I get a picture of a roller-skating mermaid?,So, in New York City, on the first Saturday of every summer,,Coney Island, our local, charmingly run-down amusement park,,hosts the Mermaid Parade. It's an amateur parade;,people come from all over the city; people get all dressed up.,Some people get less dressed up.,Young and old, dancing in the streets.,Colorful characters, and a good time is had by all.,And what I want to call your attention to is not the Mermaid Parade itself,,charming though it is, but rather to these photos.,I didn't take them. How did I get them?,And the answer is: I got them from Flickr. 
 Flickr is a photo-sharing service,that allows people to take photos, upload them,,share them over the Web and so forth.,Recently, Flickr has added an additional function called tagging.,Tagging was pioneered by Delicious and Joshua Schachter.,Delicious is a social bookmarking service.,Tagging is a cooperative infrastructure answer to classification.,Right? If I had given this talk last year,,I couldn't do what I just did,,because I couldn't have found those photos.,But instead of saying,,we need to hire a professional class of librarians,to organize these photos once they're uploaded,,Flickr simply turned over to the users,the ability to characterize the photos.,So, I was able to go in and draw down photos that had been tagged,"Mermaid Parade." There were 3,100 photos taken by 118 photographers,,all aggregated and then put under this nice, neat name,,shown in reverse chronological order.,And I was then able to go and retrieve them,to give you that little slideshow. 
 Now, what hard problem is being solved here?,And it's -- in the most schematic possible view,,it's a coordination problem, right?,There are a large number of people on the Internet,,a very small fraction of them have photos of the Mermaid Parade.,How do we get those people together to contribute that work?,The classic answer is to form an institution, right?,To draw those people into some prearranged structure,that has explicit goals.,And I want to call your attention to,some of the side effects of going the institutional route. 
 First of all, when you form an institution,,you take on a management problem, right?,No good just hiring employees,,you also have to hire other employees to manage those employees,and to enforce the goals of the institution and so forth.,Secondly, you have to bring structure into place.,Right? You have to have economic structure.,You have to have legal structure.,You have to have physical structure.,And that creates additional costs.,Third, forming an institution is inherently exclusionary.,You notice we haven't got everybody who has a photo.,You can't hire everyone in a company, right?,You can't recruit everyone into a governmental organization.,You have to exclude some people.,And fourth, as a result of that exclusion,,you end up with a professional class. Look at the change here.,We've gone from people with photos to photographers.,Right? We've created a professional class of photographers,whose goal is to go out and photograph the Mermaid Parade,,or whatever else they're sent out to photograph. 
 When you build cooperation into the infrastructure,,which is the Flickr answer,,you can leave the people where they are,and you take the problem to the individuals, rather than,moving the individuals to the problem.,You arrange the coordination in the group, and by doing that,you get the same outcome, without the institutional difficulties.,You lose the institutional imperative.,You lose the right to shape people's work when it's volunteer effort,,but you also shed the institutional cost,,which gives you greater flexibility.,What Flickr does is it replaces planning with coordination.,And this is a general aspect of these cooperative systems. 
 Right. You'll have experienced this in your life,whenever you bought your first mobile phone,,and you stopped making plans.,You just said, "I'll call you when I get there.","Call me when you get off work." Right?,That is a point-to-point replacement of coordination with planning.,Right. We're now able to do that kind of thing with groups.,To say instead of, we must make an advance plan,,we must have a five-year projection,of where the Wikipedia is going to be, or whatever,,you can just say, let's coordinate the group effort,,and let's deal with it as we go,,because we're now well-enough coordinated,that we don't have to take on the problems of deciding in advance what to do. 
 So here's another example. This one's somewhat more somber.,These are photos on Flickr tagged "Iraq.",And everything that was hard about the coordination cost,with the Mermaid Parade is even harder here.,There are more pictures. There are more photographers.,It's taken over a wider geographic area.,The photos are spread out over a longer period of time.,And worst of all, that figure at the bottom,,approximately ten photos per photographer, is a lie.,It's mathematically true,,but it doesn't really talk about anything important --,because in these systems, the average isn't really what matters. 
 What matters is this.,This is a graph of photographs tagged Iraq,as taken by the 529 photographers who contributed the 5,445 photos.,And it's ranked in order of number of photos taken per photographer.,You can see here, over at the end,,our most prolific photographer has taken around 350 photos,,and you can see there's a few people who have taken hundreds of photos.,Then there's dozens of people who've taken dozens of photos.,And by the time we get around here,,we get ten or fewer photos, and then there's this long, flat tail.,And by the time you get to the middle,,you've got hundreds of people,who have contributed only one photo each. 
 This is called a power-law distribution.,It appears often in unconstrained social systems,where people are allowed to contribute as much or as little as they like --,this is often what you get. Right?,The math behind the power-law distribution is that whatever's in the nth position,is doing about one-nth of whatever's being measured,,relative to the person in the first position.,So, we'd expect the tenth most prolific photographer,to have contributed about a tenth of the photos,,and the hundredth most prolific photographer,to have contributed only about a hundred as many photos,as the most prolific photographer did.,So, the head of the curve can be sharper or flatter.,But that basic math accounts both for the steep slope,and for the long, flat tail. 
 And curiously, in these systems, as they grow larger,,the systems don't converge; they diverge more.,In bigger systems, the head gets bigger,and the tail gets longer, so the imbalance increases.,You can see the curve is obviously heavily left-weighted. Here's how heavily:,if you take the top 10 percent of photographers contributing to this system,,they account for three quarters of the photos taken --,just the top 10 percent most prolific photographers.,If you go down to five percent,,you're still accounting for 60 percent of the photos.,If you go down to one percent, exclude 99 percent of the group effort,,you're still accounting for almost a quarter of the photos.,And because of this left weighting,,the average is actually here, way to the left.,And that sounds strange to our ears,,but what ends up happening is that 80 percent of the contributors,have contributed a below-average amount.,That sounds strange because we expect average and middle,to be about the same, but they're not at all. 
 This is the math underlying the 80/20 rule. Right?,Whenever you hear anybody talking about the 80/20 rule,,this is what's going on. Right?,20 percent of the merchandise accounts for 80 percent of the revenue,,20 percent of the users use 80 percent of the resources --,this is the shape people are talking about when that happens.,Institutions only have two tools: carrots and sticks.,And the 80 percent zone is a no-carrot and no-stick zone.,The costs of running the institution mean that you cannot,take on the work of those people easily in an institutional frame.,The institutional model always pushes leftwards,,treating these people as employees.,The institutional response is,,I can get 75 percent of the value for 10 percent of the hires -- great,,that's what I'll do.,The cooperative infrastructure model says,,why do you want to give up a quarter of the value?,If your system is designed,so that you have to give up a quarter of the value,,re-engineer the system.,Don't take on the cost that prevents you,from getting to the contributions of these people.,Build the system so that anybody can contribute at any amount. 
 So the coordination response asks not,,how are these people as employees, but rather,,what is their contribution like? Right?,We have over here Psycho Milt, a Flickr user,,who has contributed one, and only one, photo titled "Iraq.",And here's the photo. Right. Labeled, "Bad Day at Work.",Right? So the question is,,do you want that photo? Yes or no.,The question is not, is Psycho Milt a good employee? 
 And the tension here is between institution as enabler,and institution as obstacle.,When you're dealing with the left-hand edge,of one of these distributions,,when you're dealing with the people who spend a lot of time,producing a lot of the material you want,,that's an institution-as-enabler world.,You can hire those people as employees, you can coordinate their work,and you can get some output.,But when you're down here, where the Psycho Milts of the world,are adding one photo at a time,,that's institution as obstacle. 
 Institutions hate being told they're obstacles.,One of the first things that happens,when you institutionalize a problem,is that the first goal of the institution,immediately shifts from whatever the nominal goal was,to self-preservation.,And the actual goal of the institution goes to two through n.,Right? So, when institutions are told they are obstacles,,and that there are other ways of coordinating the value,,they go through something a little bit like the Kubler-Ross stages --,(Laughter),-- of reaction, being told you have a fatal illness:,denial, anger, bargaining, acceptance.,Most of the cooperative systems we've seen,haven't been around long enough,to have gotten to the acceptance phase. 
 Many, many institutions are still in denial,,but we're seeing recently a lot of both anger and bargaining.,There's a wonderful, small example going on right now.,In France, a bus company is suing people for forming a carpool,,right, because the fact that they have coordinated,themselves to create cooperative value is depriving them of revenue.,You can follow this in the Guardian.,It's actually quite entertaining. 
 The bigger question is,,what do you do about the value down here?,Right? How do you capture that?,And institutions, as I've said, are prevented from capturing that.,Steve Ballmer, now CEO of Microsoft,,was criticizing Linux a couple of years ago, and he said,,"Oh, this business of thousands of programmers,contributing to Linux, this is a myth.,We've looked at who's contributed to Linux,,and most of the patches have been produced by programmers,who've only done one thing." Right?,You can hear this distribution under that complaint.,And you can see why, from Ballmer's point of view,,that's a bad idea, right?,We hired this programmer, he came in, he drank our Cokes,and played Foosball for three years and he had one idea.,(Laughter),Right? Bad hire. Right?,(Laughter) 
 The Psycho Milt question is, was it a good idea?,What if it was a security patch?,What if it was a security patch for a buffer overflow exploit,,of which Windows has not some, [but] several?,Do you want that patch, right?,The fact that a single programmer can,,without having to move into a professional relation,to an institution, improve Linux once,and never be seen from again, should terrify Ballmer.,Because this kind of value is unreachable in classic,institutional frameworks, but is part of cooperative,systems of open-source software, of file sharing, 
 of the Wikipedia. I've used a lot of examples from Flickr,,but there are actually stories about this from all over.,Meetup, a service founded so that users could find people,in their local area who share their interests and affinities,and actually have a real-world meeting offline in a cafe,or a pub or what have you.,When Scott Heiferman founded Meetup,,he thought it would be used for, you know,,train spotters and cat fanciers -- classic affinity groups.,The inventors don't know what the invention is.,Number one group on Meetup right now,,most chapters in most cities with most members, most active?,Stay-at-home moms. Right?,In the suburbanized, dual-income United States,,stay-at-home moms are actually missing,the social infrastructure that comes from extended family,and local, small-scale neighborhoods.,So they're reinventing it, using these tools.,Meetup is the platform,,but the value here is in social infrastructure.,If you want to know what technology is going to change the world,,don't pay attention to 13-year-old boys --,pay attention to young mothers,,because they have got not an ounce of support for technology,that doesn't materially make their lives better.,This is so much more important than Xbox,,but it's a lot less glitzy. 
 I think this is a revolution.,I think that this is a really profound change,in the way human affairs are arranged.,And I use that word advisedly.,It's a revolution in that it's a change in equilibrium.,It's a whole new way of doing things, which includes new downsides.,In the United States right now, a woman named Judith Miller,is in jail for not having given to a Federal Grand Jury her sources --,she's a reporter for the New York Times --,her sources, in a very abstract and hard-to-follow case.,And journalists are in the street rallying to improve the shield laws.,The shield laws are our laws -- pretty much a patchwork of state laws --,that prevent a journalist from having to betray a source.,This is happening, however, against the background,of the rise of Web logging.,Web logging is a classic example of mass amateurization.,It has de-professionalized publishing.,Want to publish globally anything you think today?,It is a one-button operation that you can do for free.,That has sent the professional class of publishing down,into the ranks of mass amateurization.,And so the shield law, as much as we want it --,we want a professional class of truth-tellers --,it is becoming increasingly incoherent, because,the institution is becoming incoherent.,There are people in the States right now,tying themselves into knots, trying to figure out,whether or not bloggers are journalists.,And the answer to that question is,,it doesn't matter, because that's not the right question.,Journalism was an answer to an even more important question,,which is, how will society be informed?,How will they share ideas and opinions?,And if there is an answer to that that happens outside,the professional framework of journalism,,it makes no sense to take a professional metaphor,and apply it to this distributed class.,So as much as we want the shield laws,,the background -- the institution to which they were attached --,is becoming incoherent. 
 Here's another example.,Pro-ana, the pro-ana groups.,These are groups of teenage girls,who have taken on Web logs, bulletin boards,,other kinds of cooperative infrastructure,,and have used it to set up support groups for,remaining anorexic by choice.,They post pictures of thin models, which they call "thinspiration.",They have little slogans, like "Salvation through Starvation.",They even have Lance Armstrong-style bracelets,,these red bracelets, which signify, in the small group,,I am trying to maintain my eating disorder.,They trade tips, like, if you feel like eating something,,clean a toilet or the litter box. The feeling will pass. 
 We're used to support groups being beneficial.,We have an attitude that support groups are inherently beneficial.,But it turns out that the logic of the support group is value neutral.,A support group is simply a small group that wants to maintain,a way of living in the context of a larger group.,Now, when the larger group is a bunch of drunks,,and the small group wants to stay sober, then we think,,that's a great support group.,But when the small group is teenage girls,who want to stay anorexic by choice, then we're horrified.,What's happened is that the normative goals,of the support groups that we're used to,,came from the institutions that were framing them,,and not from the infrastructure.,Once the infrastructure becomes generically available,,the logic of the support group has been revealed to be,accessible to anyone, including people pursuing these kinds of goals. 
 So, there are significant downsides to these changes,as well as upsides. And of course, in the current environment,,one need allude only lightly to the work of non-state actors,trying to influence global affairs, and taking advantage of these.,This is a social map of the hijackers and their associates,who perpetrated the 9/11 attack.,It was produced by analyzing their communications patterns,using a lot of these tools. And doubtless the intelligence communities of the world,are doing the same work today for the attacks of last week. 
 Now, this is the part of the talk where I tell you,what's going to come as a result of all of this,,but I'm running out of time, which is good,,because I don't know.,(Laughter),Right. As with the printing press, if it's really a revolution,,it doesn't take us from Point A to Point B.,It takes us from Point A to chaos.,The printing press precipitated 200 years of chaos,,moving from a world where the Catholic Church,was the sort of organizing political force to the Treaty of Westphalia,,when we finally knew what the new unit was: the nation state. 
 Now, I'm not predicting 200 years of chaos as a result of this. 50.,50 years in which loosely coordinated groups,are going to be given increasingly high leverage,,and the more those groups forego traditional institutional imperatives --,like deciding in advance what's going to happen,,or the profit motive -- the more leverage they'll get.,And institutions are going to come under,an increasing degree of pressure,,and the more rigidly managed, and the more they rely,on information monopolies, the greater the pressure is going to be.,And that's going to happen one arena at a time,,one institution at a time. The forces are general,,but the results are going to be specific. 
 And so the point here is not,,"This is wonderful," or "We're going to see a transition,from only institutions to only cooperative framework.",It's going to be much more complicated than that.,But the point is that it's going to be a massive readjustment.,And since we can see it in advance and know it's coming,,my argument is essentially: we might as well get good at it.,Thank you very much.,(Applause)I want to start with a story, a la Seth Godin,,from when I was 12 years old.,My uncle Ed gave me a beautiful blue sweater --,at least I thought it was beautiful.,And it had fuzzy zebras walking across the stomach,,and Mount Kilimanjaro and Mount Meru were kind of,right across the chest, that were also fuzzy.,And I wore it whenever I could,,thinking it was the most fabulous thing I owned. 
 Until one day in ninth grade,,when I was standing with a number of the football players.,And my body had clearly changed, and Matt,,who was undeniably my nemesis in high school,,said in a booming voice that,we no longer had to go far away to go on ski trips,,but we could all ski on Mount Novogratz.,(Laughter),And I was so humiliated and mortified,that I immediately ran home to my mother and chastised her,for ever letting me wear the hideous sweater.,We drove to the Goodwill and we threw the sweater away,somewhat ceremoniously,,my idea being that I would never have to think about the sweater,nor see it ever again. 
 Fast forward -- 11 years later, I'm a 25-year-old kid.,I'm working in Kigali, Rwanda, jogging through the steep slopes,,when I see, 10 feet in front of me, a little boy -- 11 years old --,running toward me, wearing my sweater.,And I'm thinking, no, this is not possible.,But so, curious, I run up to the child -- of course,scaring the living bejesus out of him --,grab him by the collar, turn it over, and there is my name,written on the collar of this sweater. 
 I tell that story, because it has served and continues to serve,as a metaphor to me about the level of connectedness,that we all have on this Earth.,We so often don't realize what our action and our inaction,does to people we think we will never see and never know.,I also tell it because it tells a larger contextual story,of what aid is and can be.,That this traveled into the Goodwill in Virginia,,and moved its way into the larger industry,,which at that point was giving millions of tons of secondhand clothing to Africa and Asia.,Which was a very good thing, providing low cost clothing.,And at the same time, certainly in Rwanda,,it destroyed the local retailing industry.,Not to say that it shouldn't have,,but that we have to get better at answering the questions,that need to be considered when we think about consequences,and responses. 
 So, I'm going to stick in Rwanda, circa 1985, 1986,,where I was doing two things.,I had started a bakery with 20 unwed mothers.,We were called the "Bad News Bears," and our notion was,we were going to corner the snack food business in Kigali,,which was not hard because there were no snacks before us.,And because we had a good business model, we actually did it,,and I watched these women transform on a micro-level.,But at the same time, I started a micro-finance bank,,and tomorrow Iqbal Quadir is going to talk about Grameen,,which is the grandfather of all micro-finance banks,,which now is a worldwide movement -- you talk about a meme --,but then it was quite new, especially in an economy,that was moving from barter into trade. 
 We got a lot of things right.,We focused on a business model; we insisted on skin in the game.,The women made their own decisions at the end of the day,as to how they would use this access to credit,to build their little businesses, earn more income,so they could take care of their families better. 
 What we didn't understand, what was happening all around us,,with the confluence of fear, ethnic strife,and certainly an aid game, if you will, that was playing into,this invisible but certainly palpable movement inside Rwanda,,that at that time, 30 percent of the budget was all foreign aid.,The genocide happened in 1994,,seven years after these women all worked together,to build this dream.,And the good news was that the institution,,the banking institution, lasted.,In fact, it became the largest rehabilitation lender in the country.,The bakery was completely wiped out,,but the lessons for me were that accountability counts --,got to build things with people on the ground,,using business models where, as Steven Levitt would say,,the incentives matter.,Understand, however complex we may be, incentives matter. 
 So when Chris raised to me how wonderful everything,that was happening in the world,,that we were seeing a shift in zeitgeist,,on the one hand I absolutely agree with him,,and I was so thrilled to see what happened with the G8 --,that the world, because of people like Tony Blair and Bono,and Bob Geldof -- the world is talking about global poverty;,the world is talking about Africa,in ways I have never seen in my life.,It's thrilling.,And at the same time, what keeps me up at night,is a fear that we'll look at the victories of the G8 --,50 billion dollars in increased aid to Africa,,40 billion in reduced debt -- as the victory,,as more than chapter one, as our moral absolution. 
 And in fact, what we need to do is see that as chapter one,,celebrate it, close it, and recognize that we need a chapter two,that is all about execution, all about the how-to.,And if you remember one thing from what I want to talk about today,,it's that the only way to end poverty, to make it history,,is to build viable systems on the ground,that deliver critical and affordable goods and services to the poor,,in ways that are financially sustainable and scaleable.,If we do that, we really can make poverty history. 
 And it was that -- that whole philosophy --,that encouraged me to start my current endeavor,called "Acumen Fund,",which is trying to build some mini-blueprints,for how we might do that in water, health and housing,in Pakistan, India, Kenya, Tanzania and Egypt.,And I want to talk a little bit about that, and some of the examples,,so you can see what it is that we're doing.,But before I do this -- and this is another one of my pet peeves --,I want to talk a little bit about who the poor are.,Because we too often talk about them as these,strong, huge masses of people yearning to be free,,when in fact, it's quite an amazing story.,On a macro level, four billion people on Earth make less than four dollars a day. 
 That's who we talk about when we think about "the poor.",If you aggregate it, it's the third largest economy on Earth,,and yet most of these people go invisible.,Where we typically work, there's people making between,one and three dollars a day.,Who are these people?,They are farmers and factory workers.,They work in government offices. They're drivers.,They are domestics.,They typically pay for critical goods and services like water,,like healthcare, like housing, and they pay 30 to 40 times,what their middleclass counterparts pay --,certainly where we work in Karachi and Nairobi.,The poor also are willing to make, and do make, smart decisions,,if you give them that opportunity. 
 So, two examples.,One is in India, where there are 240 million farmers,,most of whom make less than two dollars a day.,Where we work in Aurangabad, the land is extraordinarily parched.,You see people on average making 60 cents to a dollar.,This guy in pink is a social entrepreneur named Ami Tabar.,What he did was see what was happening in Israel, larger approaches,,and figure out how to do a drip irrigation,,which is a way of bringing water directly to the plant stock.,But previously it's only been created for large-scale farms,,so Ami Tabar took this and modularized it down to an eighth of an acre.,A couple of principles:,build small.,Make it infinitely expandable and affordable to the poor. 
 This family, Sarita and her husband, bought a 15-dollar unit,when they were living in a -- literally a three-walled lean-to,with a corrugated iron roof.,After one harvest, they had increased their income enough,to buy a second system to do their full quarter-acre.,A couple of years later, I meet them.,They now make four dollars a day, which is pretty much middle class for India,,and they showed me the concrete foundation they had just laid,to build their house.,And I swear, you could see the future in that woman's eyes.,Something I truly believe. 
 You can't talk about poverty today without talking about malaria bed nets,,and I again give Jeffrey Sachs of Harvard,huge kudos for bringing to the world,this notion of his rage -- for five dollars you can save a life.,Malaria is a disease that kills one to three million people a year.,300 to 500 million cases are reported.,It's estimated that Africa loses,about 13 billion dollars a year to the disease.,Five dollars can save a life.,We can send people to the moon; we can see if there's life on Mars --,why can't we get five-dollar nets to 500 million people? 
 The question, though, is not "Why can't we?",The question is how can we help Africans do this for themselves?,A lot of hurdles.,One: production is too low. Two: price is too high.,Three: this is a good road in -- right near where our factory is located.,Distribution is a nightmare, but not impossible.,We started by making a 350,000-dollar loan,to the largest traditional bed net manufacturer in Africa,so that they could transfer technology from Japan,and build these long-lasting, five-year nets.,Here are just some pictures of the factory. 
 Today, three years later, the company has employed,another thousand women.,It contributes about 600,000 dollars in wages to the economy of Tanzania.,It's the largest company in Tanzania.,The throughput rate right now is 1.5 million nets,,three million by the end of the year.,We hope to have seven million at the end of next year.,So the production side is working.,On the distribution side, though,,as a world, we have a lot of work to do.,Right now, 95 percent of these nets are being bought by the U.N.,,and then given primarily to people around Africa.,We're looking at building,on some of the most precious resources of Africa: people.,Their women. 
 And so I want you to meet Jacqueline,,my namesake, 21 years old.,If she were born anywhere else but Tanzania,,I'm telling you, she could run Wall Street.,She runs two of the lines, and has already saved enough money,to put a down payment on her house.,She makes about two dollars a day, is creating an education fund,,and told me she is not marrying nor having children,until these things are completed.,And so, when I told her about our idea --,that maybe we could take a Tupperware model from the United States,,and find a way for the women themselves to go out,and sell these nets to others --,she quickly started calculating what she herself could make,and signed up. 
 We took a lesson from IDEO, one of our favorite companies,,and quickly did a prototyping on this,,and took Jacqueline into the area where she lives.,She brought 10 of the women with whom she interacts,together to see if she could sell these nets, five dollars apiece,,despite the fact that people say nobody will buy one,,and we learned a lot about how you sell things.,Not coming in with our own notions,,because she didn't even talk about malaria until the very end.,First, she talked about comfort, status, beauty.,These nets, she said, you put them on the floor, bugs leave your house.,Children can sleep through the night;,the house looks beautiful; you hang them in the window.,And we've started making curtains,,and not only is it beautiful, but people can see status --,that you care about your children.,Only then did she talk about saving your children's lives.,A lot of lessons to be learned in terms of how we sell,goods and services to the poor. 
 I want to end just by saying that there's enormous opportunity,to make poverty history.,To do it right, we have to build business models that matter,,that are scaleable and that work with Africans, Indians,,people all over the developing world,who fit in this category, to do it themselves.,Because at the end of the day, it's about engagement.,It's about understanding that people really don't want handouts,,that they want to make their own decisions;,they want to solve their own problems;,and that by engaging with them,,not only do we create much more dignity for them,,but for us as well.,And so I urge all of you to think next time,as to how to engage with this notion and this opportunity,that we all have -- to make poverty history --,by really becoming part of the process,and moving away from an us-and-them world,,and realizing that it's about all of us,,and the kind of world that we, together, want to live in and share.,Thank you.,(Applause)When I'm starting talks like this,,I usually do a whole spiel about sustainability,because a lot of people out there don't know what that is.,This is a crowd that does know what it is,,so I'll like just do like the 60-second crib-note version. Right?,So just bear with me. We'll go real fast, you know?,Fill in the blanks.,So, you know, sustainability, small planet.,Right? Picture a little Earth, circling around the sun.,You know, about a million years ago,,a bunch of monkeys fell out of trees,,got a little clever, harnessed fire,,invented the printing press,,made, you know, luggage with wheels on it.,And, you know, built the society that we now live in.,Unfortunately, while this society is, without a doubt,,the most prosperous and dynamic the world has ever created,,it's got some major, major flaws. 
 One of them is that every society has an ecological footprint.,It has an amount of impact on the planet that's measurable.,How much stuff goes through your life,,how much waste is left behind you.,And we, at the moment, in our society,,have a really dramatically unsustainable level of this.,We're using up about five planets.,If everybody on the planet lived the way we did,,we'd need between five, six, seven,,some people even say 10 planets to make it.,Clearly we don't have 10 planets.,Again, you know, mental, visual, 10 planets, one planet,,10 planets, one planet. Right?,We don't have that. So that's one problem. 
 The second problem is that the planet that we have,is being used in wildly unfair ways. Right?,North Americans, such as myself, you know,,we're basically sort of wallowing, gluttonous hogs,,and we're eating all sorts of stuff.,And, you know, then you get all the way down,to people who live in the Asia-Pacific region, or even more, Africa.,And people simply do not have enough to survive.,This is producing all sorts of tensions,,all sorts of dynamics that are deeply disturbing.,And there's more and more people on the way. Right?,So, this is what the planet's going to look like in 20 years.,It's going to be a pretty crowded place, at least eight billion people. 
 So to make matters even more difficult, it's a very young planet.,A third of the people on this planet are kids.,And those kids are growing up in a completely different way,than their parents did, no matter where they live.,They've been exposed to this idea of our society, of our prosperity.,And they may not want to live exactly like us.,They may not want to be Americans, or Brits,,or Germans, or South Africans,,but they want their own version,of a life which is more prosperous, and more dynamic,,and more, you know, enjoyable.,And all of these things combine to create,an enormous amount of torque on the planet.,And if we cannot figure out a way to deal with that torque,,we are going to find ourselves more and more and more quickly,facing situations which are simply unthinkable. 
 Everybody in this room has heard the worst-case scenarios.,I don't need to go into that.,But I will ask the question, what's the alternative?,And I would say that, at the moment, the alternative is unimaginable.,You know, so on the one hand we have the unthinkable;,on the other hand we have the unimaginable.,We don't know yet how to build a society,which is environmentally sustainable,,which is shareable with everybody on the planet,,which promotes stability and democracy and human rights,,and which is achievable in the time-frame necessary,to make it through the challenges we face.,We don't know how to do this yet. 
 So what's Worldchanging?,Well, Worldchanging you might think of,as being a bit of a news service for the unimaginable future.,You know, what we're out there doing is looking,for examples of tools, models and ideas,,which, if widely adopted, would change the game.,A lot of times, when I do a talk like this, I talk about things,that everybody in this room I'm sure has already heard of,,but most people haven't.,So I thought today I'd do something a little different,,and talk about what we're looking for, rather than saying, you know,,rather than giving you tried-and-true examples.,Talk about the kinds of things we're scoping out.,Give you a little peek into our editorial notebook.,And given that I have 13 minutes to do this, this is going to go kind of quick.,So, I don't know, just stick with me. Right? 
 So, first of all, what are we looking for? Bright Green city.,One of the biggest levers that we have in the developed world,for changing the impact that we have on the planet,is changing the way that we live in cities.,We're already an urban planet;,that's especially true in the developed world.,And people who live in cities in the developed world,tend to be very prosperous, and thus use a lot of stuff.,If we can change the dynamic,,by first of all creating cities that are denser and more livable ...,Here, for example, is Vancouver, which if you haven't been there,,you ought to go for a visit. It's a fabulous city.,And they are doing density, new density,,better than probably anybody else on the planet right now.,They're actually managing to talk North Americans out of driving cars,,which is a pretty great thing.,So you have density. You also have growth management.,You leave aside what is natural to be natural. 
 This is in Portland. That is an actual development.,That land there will remain pasture in perpetuity.,They've bounded the city with a line.,Nature, city. Nothing changes.,Once you do those things, you can start making all sorts of investments.,You can start doing things like, you know,,transit systems that actually work to transport people,,in effective and reasonably comfortable manners.,You can also start to change what you build.,This is the Beddington Zero Energy Development in London,,which is one of the greenest buildings in the world. It's a fabulous place.,We're able to now build buildings that generate all their own electricity,,that recycle much of their water,,that are much more comfortable than standard buildings,,use all-natural light, etc., and, over time, cost less.,Green roofs. Bill McDonough covered that last night, so I won't dwell on that too much. 
 But once you also have people living,in close proximity to each other,,one of the things you can do is --,as information technologies develop --,you can start to have smart places.,You can start to know where things are.,When you know where things are, it becomes easier to share them.,When you share them, you end up using less.,So one great example is car-share clubs,,which are really starting to take off in the U.S.,,have already taken off in many places in Europe, and are a great example.,If you're somebody who drives, you know, one day a week,,do you really need your own car? 
 Another thing that information technology lets us do,is start figuring out how to use less stuff,by knowing, and by monitoring, the amount we're actually using.,So, here's a power cord which glows brighter the more energy that you use,,which I think is a pretty cool concept,,although I think it ought to work the other way around,,that it gets brighter the more you don't use.,But, you know, there may even be a simpler approach.,We could just re-label things.,This light switch that reads, on the one hand, flashfloods,,and on the other hand, off.,How we build things can change as well.,This is a bio-morphic building.,It takes its inspiration in form from life.,Many of these buildings are incredibly beautiful,,and also much more effective.,This is an example of bio-mimicry,,which is something we're really starting to look a lot more for.,In this case, you have a shell design,which was used to create a new kind of exhaust fan, which is greatly more effective.,There's a lot of this stuff happening; it's really pretty remarkable.,I encourage you to look on Worldchanging if you're into it.,We're starting to cover this more and more.,There's also neo-biological design,,where more and more we're actually using life itself,and the processes of life to become part of our industry.,So this, for example, is hydrogen-generating algae.,So we have a model in potential, an emerging model that we're looking for,of how to take the cities most of us live in,,and turn them into Bright Green cities. 
 But unfortunately, most of the people on the planet don't live in the cites we live in.,They live in the emerging megacities of the developing world.,And there's a statistic I often like to use,,which is that we're adding a city of Seattle every four days,,a city the size of Seattle to the planet every four days.,I was giving a talk about two months ago,,and this guy, who'd done some work with the U.N., came up to me,and was really flustered, and he said, look,,you've got that totally wrong; it's totally wrong.,It's every seven days.,So, we're adding a city the size of Seattle every seven days,,and most of those cities look more like this than the city that you or I live in.,Most of those cites are growing incredibly quickly.,They don't have existing infrastructure;,they have enormous numbers of people who are struggling with poverty,,and enormous numbers of people are trying to figure out,how to do things in new ways. 
 So what do we need in order to make developing nation,megacities into Bright Green megacities?,Well, the first thing we need is, we need leapfrogging.,And this is one of the things that we are looking for everywhere.,The idea behind leapfrogging is that,if you are a person, or a country, who is stuck in a situation,where you don't have the tools and technologies that you need,,there's no reason for you to invest in last generation's technologies. Right?,That you're much better off, almost universally,,looking for a low-cost or locally applicable version of the newest technology.,One place we're all familiar with seeing this is with cell phones. Right?,All throughout the developing world, people are going directly to cell phones,,skipping the whole landline stage.,If there are landlines in many developing world cities,,they're usually pretty crappy systems that break down a lot,and cost enormous amounts of money.,So I rather like this picture here.,I particularly like the Ganesh in the background, talking on the cell phone.,So what we have, increasingly, is cell phones just permeating out through society.,We've heard all about this here this week,,so I won't say too much more than that, other than to say,what is true for cell phones is true for all sorts of technologies. 
 The second thing is tools for collaboration,,be they systems of collaboration, or intellectual property systems,which encourage collaboration. Right?,When you have free ability for people to freely work together and innovate,,you get different kinds of solutions.,And those solutions are accessible in a different way,to people who don't have capital. Right?,So, you know, we have open source software,,we have Creative Commons and other kinds of Copyleft solutions.,And those things lead to things like this.,This is a Telecentro in Sao Paulo.,This is a pretty remarkable program,using free and open source software, cheap, sort of hacked-together machines,,and basically sort of abandoned buildings --,has put together a bunch of community centers,where people can come in, get high-speed internet access,,learn computer programming skills for free.,And a quarter-million people every year use these now in Sao Paulo.,And those quarter-million people are some of the poorest people in Sao Paolo.,I particularly like the little Linux penguin in the back. (Laughter) 
 So one of the things that that's leading to is a sort of southern cultural explosion.,And one of the things we're really, really interested in at Worldchanging,is the ways in which the south is re-identifying itself,,and re-categorizing itself in ways,that have less and less to do with most of us in this room.,So it's not, you know, Bollywood isn't just answering Hollywood. Right?,You know, Brazilian music scene isn't just answering the major labels.,It's doing something new. There's new things happening.,There's interplay between them. And, you know, you get amazing things.,Like, I don't know if any of you have seen the movie "City of God?",Yeah, it's a fabulous movie if you haven't seen it.,And it's all about this question, in a very artistic and indirect kind of way. 
 You have other radical examples,where the ability to use cultural tools is spreading out.,These are people who have just been visited by,the Internet bookmobile in Uganda.,And who are waving their first books in the air,,which, I just think that's a pretty cool picture. You know?,So you also have the ability for people to start coming together,and acting on their own behalf in political and civic ways,,in ways that haven't happened before.,And as we heard last night, as we've heard earlier this week,,are absolutely, fundamentally vital to the ability to craft new solutions,,is we've got to craft new political realities. 
 And I would personally say that we have to craft new political realities,,not only in places like India, Afghanistan, Kenya, Pakistan,,what have you, but here at home as well.,Another world is possible.,And sort of the big motto of the anti-globalization movement. Right?,We tweak that a lot.,We talk about how another world isn't just possible; another world's here.,That it's not just that we have to sort of imagine,there being a different, vague possibility out there,,but we need to start acting a little bit more on that possibility.,We need to start doing things like Lula, President of Brazil.,How many people knew of Lula before today?,OK, so, much, much better than the average crowd, I can tell you that.,So Lula, he's full of problems, full of contradictions,,but one of the things that he's doing is,,he is putting forward an idea of how we engage in international relations that,completely shifts the balance from the standard sort of north-south dialogue,into a whole new way of global collaboration.,I would keep your eye on this fellow. 
 Another example of this sort of second superpower thing,is the rise of these games that are what we call "serious play.",We're looking a lot at this. This is spreading everywhere.,This is from "A Force More Powerful." It's a little screenshot.,"A Force More Powerful" is a video game that,,while you're playing it, it teaches you how to engage,in non-violent insurrection and regime change. (Laughter),Here's another one. This is from a game called "Food Force,",which is a game that teaches children how to run a refugee camp.,These things are all contributing in a very dynamic way,to a huge rise in, especially in the developing world,,in people's interest in and passion for democracy.,We get so little news about the developing world,that we often forget that there are literally,millions of people out there struggling to change things,to be fairer, freer, more democratic, less corrupt.,And, you know, we don't hear those stories enough.,But it's happening all over the place,,and these tools are part of what's making it possible. 
 Now when you add all those things together,,when you add together leapfrogging and new kinds of tools,,you know, second superpower stuff, etc., what do you get?,Well, very quickly, you get a Bright Green future for the developing world.,You get, for example, green power spread throughout the world.,You get -- this is a building in Hyderabad, India.,It's the greenest building in the world.,You get grassroots solutions, things that work,for people who have no capital or limited access.,You get barefoot solar engineers carrying solar panels into the remote mountains.,You get access to distance medicine.,These are Indian nurses learning how to use PDAs,to access databases that have information,that they don't have access to at home in a distant manner.,You get new tools for people in the developing world.,These are LED lights that help the roughly billion people out there,,for whom nightfall means darkness,,to have a new means of operating.,These are refrigerators that require no electricity;,they're pot within a pot design. 
 And you get water solutions. Water's one of the most pressing problems.,Here's a design for harvesting rainwater that's super cheap,and available to people in the developing world.,Here's a design for distilling water using sunlight.,Here's a fog-catcher, which, if you live in a moist, jungle-like area,,will distill water from the air that's clean and drinkable.,Here's a way of transporting water.,I just love this, you know -- I mean carrying water is such a drag,,and somebody just came up with the idea of well, what if you rolled it. Right?,I mean, that's a great design.,This is a fabulous invention, LifeStraw.,Basically you can suck any water through this,and it will become drinkable by the time it hits your lips.,So, you know, people who are in desperate straits can get this.,This is one of my favorite Worldchanging kinds of things ever.,This is a merry-go-round invented by the company Roundabout,,which pumps water as kids play. You know?,Seriously -- give that one a hand, it's pretty great.,And the same thing is true for people who are in absolute crisis. Right? 
 We're expecting to have upwards of 200 million refugees by the year 2020,because of climate change and political instability.,How do we help people like that?,Well, there's all sorts of amazing new humanitarian designs,that are being developed in collaborative ways all across the planet.,Some of those designs include models for acting,,such as new models for village instruction in the middle of refugee camps.,New models for pedagogy for the displaced.,And we have new tools.,This is one of my absolute favorite things anywhere.,Does anyone know what this is? 
 Audience: It detects landmines. 
 Alex Steffen: Exactly, this is a landmine-detecting flower.,If you are living in one of the places,where the roughly half-billion unaccounted for mines are scattered,,you can fling these seeds out into the field.,And as they grow up, they will grow up around the mines,,their roots will detect the chemicals in them,,and where the flowers turn red you don't step.,Yeah, so seeds that could save your life. You know? 
 (Applause) 
 I also love it because it seems to me,that the example, the tools we use to change the world,,ought to be beautiful in themselves.,You know, that it's not just enough to survive.,We've got to make something better than what we've got.,And I think that we will.,Just to wrap up, in the immortal words of H.G. Wells,,I think that better things are on the way.,I think that, in fact, that "all of the past is but the beginning of a beginning.,All that the human mind has accomplished,is but the dream before the awakening.",I hope that that turns out to be true.,The people in this room have given me more confidence than ever that it will. 
 Thank you very much. 
 (Applause)I'm a contemporary artist and I show in art galleries and museums.,I show a number of photographs and films,,but I also make television programs, books and some advertising,,all with the same concept.,And it's about our fixation with celebrity and celebrity culture,,and the importance of the image:,celebrity is born of photography. 
 I'm going to start with how I started with this concept seven years ago,,when Princess Diana died.,There was a sort of a standstill in Britain,the moment of her death,,and people decided to mourn her death in a sort of mass way.,I was fascinated by this phenomenon,,so I wondered:,could one erase the image of Diana, actually quite crudely and physically?,So, I got a gun and started to shoot at the image of Diana,,but I couldn't erase this from my memory,and certainly it was not being erased from the public psyche.,Momentum was being built.,The press wrote about her death in rather, I felt, pornographic ways --,like, "Which bit of artery left which bit of body?",and "How did she die in the back of the car?" --,and I was intrigued by this sort of mass voyeurism,,so I made these rather gory images. 
 I then went on wondering whether I could actually replace her image,,so I got a look-alike of Diana,and posed her in the right positions and angles,and created something that was in, or existed in, the public imagination.,So people were wondering: was she going to marry Dodi?,Was she in love with him?,Was she pregnant? Did she want his baby?,Was she pregnant when she died?,So I created this image of Diana, Dodi and their imaginary mixed-race child,and this image came out, which caused a huge public outcry at the time. 
 I then went on to make more comments on the media and press imagery,,so I started making reference to media imagery --,made it grainy, shot through doorways and so on and so forth --,to titillate the public or the viewer further,in terms of trying to make the viewer more aware of their own voyeurism.,So, this is an image of Diana looking at Camilla kissing her husband,,and this was a sequence of images.,And this gets shown in art galleries like this, as a sequence.,And similarly with the Di-Dodian baby imagery --,this is another art gallery installation. 
 I'm particularly interested in how you can't rely on your own perception.,This is Jane Smith and Jo Bloggs, for instance,,but you think it's Camilla and the Queen,,and I'm fascinated how what you think is real isn't necessarily real.,And the camera can lie,,and it makes it very, very easy,with the mass bombardment of imagery to tell untruths.,So, I continued to work on this project of how photography seduces us,and is more interesting to look at than the actual real subject matter.,And at the same time, it removes us from the real subject matter, 
 and this acts as a sort of titillating thing.,So, the photograph becomes this teaser and incites desire and voyeurism;,what you can't have, you want more.,In the photograph, the real subject doesn't exist,so it makes you want that person more.,And that is the way, I think, that celebrity magazines work now:,the more pictures you see of these celebrities,,the more you feel you know them,,but you don't know them,and you want to know them further. 
 Of course, the Queen goes to her stud often to watch her horses ...,watch her horses. (Laughter).,And then I was sort of making imagery.,In England there's an expression: "you can't imagine the Queen on the loo.",So I'm trying to penetrate that.,Well, here is the image. 
 All this imagery was creating a lot of fuss,and I was cited as a disgusting artist. The press were writing about this,,giving full pages about how terrible this was.,Which I found very interesting that it was going full cycle:,I was making comments about the press,and about how we know facts and information only by media --,because we don't know the real people;,very few of us know the real people --,but it was going back into the press,and they were publicizing, effectively, my filthy work.,So, these are broadsheets, tabloids, debates were being had all about this work,,films were being banned before people had actually had the look at the work,,politicians were getting involved --,all sorts of things -- great headlines. 
 Then suddenly, it started to get on front pages.,I was being asked and paid to do front covers.,Suddenly I was becoming sort of acceptable,,which I found also fascinating.,How one moment -- it was disgusting --,journalists would lie to me to get a story or a photograph of me,,saying my work was wonderful,,and the next minute there were terrible headlines about me.,But then this changed suddenly. 
 I then started to work for magazines and newspapers.,This was, for example, an image that went into Tatler.,This was another newspaper image.,It was an April fool actually, and to this day some people think it's real.,I was sitting next to someone at dinner the other day,,and they were saying there's this great image of the Queen,sitting outside William Hill.,They thought it was real. 
 I was exploring, at the time, the hyperbole of icons --,and Diana and Marilyn -- and the importance of celebrity in our lives.,How they wheedle their way into the collective psyche,without us even knowing,,and how that should happen.,I explored with actually dressing up as the celebrities myself.,There's me as Diana --,I look like the mass murderer Myra Hindley, I think, in this one. (Laughter).,And me as the Queen.,I then continued on to make a whole body of work about Marilyn --,the biggest icon of all --,and trying to titillate by shooting through doorways and shutters and so on and so forth,,and only showing certain angles to create a reality that, obviously,,is completely constructed.,This is the look-alike, so the crafting elements of this is completely enormous.,She looks nothing like Marilyn,,but by the time we've made her up and put wigs and makeup on,,she looks exactly like Marilyn,,to the extent that her husband couldn't recognize her --,or recognize this look-alike -- in these photographs,,which I find quite interesting.,So, all this work is getting shown in art galleries.,Then I made a book.,I was also making a TV series for the BBC at the time.,Stills from the TV series went into this book. 
 But there was a real legal problem because it looks real,,but how do you get over that?,Because obviously it's making a comment about our culture right now:,that we can't tell what's real.,How do we know when we're looking at something whether it's real or not?,So, from my point of view, it's important to publish it,,but at the same time it does cause a confusion --,intentional on my behalf,,but problematic for any outlet that I'm working with.,So a big disclaimer is put on everything that I do,,and I made narratives about all the European or Brit celebrities,and comments about our public figures.,You know, what does Tony Blair get up to in private with his fashion guru?,And also dealing with the perceptions that are put about,Bin Laden, Saddam Hussein, the links that were put about pre-Iraq war.,And what is going to happen to the monarchy?,Because obviously the British public,,I think, would prefer William to Charles on the throne. 
 And it's that wish, or that desire, that I suppose I'm dealing with in my work.,I'm not really interested in the celebrity themselves.,I'm interested in the perception of the celebrity.,And with some look-alikes, they are so good,you don't know whether they're real or not. 
 I did an advertising campaign for Schweppes, which is Coca-Cola,,and so that was very interesting in terms of the legalities.,It's highly commercial.,But it was a difficulty for me -- because this is my artwork;,should I do advertising? -- at the time.,So I made sure the work was not compromised in any way,and that the integrity of the work remained the same.,But the meanings changed in the sense that with the logo on,,you're closing all the lines of interpretation down to selling a product,and that's all you're doing.,When you take the logo off, you're opening up the interpretations,and making the work inconclusive,,opposed to conclusive when you are advertising. 
 This image is quite interesting, actually,,because I think we made it three years ago.,And it's Camilla in her wedding dress, which, again,,nearly got re-used now, recently prior to her wedding.,Tony Blair and Cherie. And again, the legalities -- we had to be very careful.,It's obviously a very big commercial company, and so this little,,"Shh -- it's not really them,",was put on the side of the imagery.,And Margaret Thatcher visiting Jeffery Archer in jail. 
 I then was asked by Selfridges to do a series of windows for them,,so I built a sauna bath in one of their windows and created little scenes --,live scenes with look-alikes inside the windows,,and the windows were all steamed up.,So, it's Tony Blair reading and practicing his speech;,I've got them doing yoga inside there with Carole Caplin;,Sven making out with Ulrika Jonsson, who he was having an affair with at that time.,This was a huge success for them,because the imagery got shown in the press the day after,in every single newspaper, broadsheets and tabloids.,It was a bit of a road stopper, which was problematic,because the police kept on trying to clear away the crowds,,but huge fun -- it was great for me to do a performance.,Also, people were taking photographs of this,,so it was being texted around the world extremely quickly, all this imagery.,And the press were interviewing, and I was signing my book. (Laughter). 
 Further imagery. I'm making a new book now with Taschen,that I'm working on really for a sort of global market --,my previous book was only for the U.K. market --,that I suppose it could be called humorous.,I suppose I come from a sort of non-humorous background,with serious intent,,and then suddenly my work is funny.,And I think it doesn't really matter that my work is considered humorous, in a way;,I think it's a way in for me to deal with the importance of imagery,and how we read all our information through imagery.,It's an extremely fast way of getting information.,It's extremely difficult if it's constructed correctly,,and there are techniques of constructing iconic imagery. 
 This image, for example, is sort of spot-on,because it exactly sums up what Elton may be doing in private,,and also what might be happening with Saddam Hussein, and George Bush,reading the Koran upside-down.,For example, George Bush target practice --,shooting at Bin Laden and Michael Moore.,And then you change the photograph he's shooting at,,and it suddenly becomes rather grim and maybe less accessible. (Laughter).,Tony Blair being used as a mounting block,,and Rumsfeld and Bush laughing with some Abu Ghraib photos behind,,and the seriousness, or the intellect, of Bush.,And also, commenting on the behind the scenes --,well, as we know now -- what goes on in prisons.,And in fact, George Bush and Tony Blair,are having great fun during all of this. 
 And really commenting, you know,,based on the perception we have of the celebrities.,What Jack Nicholson might be up to in his celebrity life,,and the fact that he tried to ... he had a bit of road rage,and golf-clubbed a driver the other day.,I mean, it's extremely difficult to find these look-alikes,,so I'm constantly going up to people in the street,and trying to ask people to come,and be in one of my photographs or films.,And sometimes asking the real celebrity,,mistaking them for someone who just looks like the real person,,which is highly embarrassing. (Laughter). 
 I've also been working with The Guardian on a topical basis --,a page a week in their newspaper --,which has been very interesting, working topically.,So, Jamie Oliver and school dinners;,Bush and Blair having difficulty getting alongside Muslim culture;,the whole of the hunting issue,,and the royal family refusing to stop hunting;,and the tsunami issues; and obviously Harry;,Blair's views on Gordon Brown, which I find very interesting;,Condi and Bush.,This image I've decided to show having a reservation about it.,I made it a year ago. And just how meanings change,,and there were a terrible thing that has happened,,but the fear is lurking around in our minds prior to that.,That's why this image was made one year ago,,and what it means today.,So, I'll leave you with these clips to have a look. (Music) 
 Chris Anderson: Thank you.What I'd like to start off with is an observation,,which is that if I've learned anything over the last year,,it's that the supreme irony,of publishing a book about slowness,is that you have to go around promoting it really fast.,I seem to spend most of my time these days,zipping from city to city, studio to studio,,interview to interview,,serving up the book in really tiny bite-size chunks.,Because everyone these days,wants to know how to slow down,,but they want to know how to slow down really quickly. So ...,so I did a spot on CNN the other day,where I actually spent more time in makeup than I did talking on air.,And I think that -- that's not really surprising though, is it?,Because that's kind of the world that we live in now,,a world stuck in fast-forward. 
 A world obsessed with speed,,with doing everything faster, with cramming more and more,into less and less time.,Every moment of the day feels like,a race against the clock.,To borrow a phrase from Carrie Fisher, which is,in my bio there; I'll just toss it out again --,"These days even instant gratification takes too long." (Laughter),And,if you think about how we to try to make things better, what do we do?,No, we speed them up, don't we? So we used to dial; now we speed dial.,We used to read; now we speed read. We used to walk; now we speed walk.,And of course, we used to date and now we speed date.,And even things that are by their very nature slow --,we try and speed them up too.,So I was in New York recently, and I walked past a gym,that had an advertisement in the window for a new course, a new evening course.,And it was for, you guessed it, speed yoga.,So this -- the perfect solution for time-starved professionals,who want to, you know, salute the sun,,but only want to give over about 20 minutes to it.,I mean, these are sort of the extreme examples,,and they're amusing and good to laugh at. 
 But there's a very serious point,,and I think that in the headlong dash of daily life,,we often lose sight of the damage,that this roadrunner form of living does to us.,We're so marinated in the culture of speed,that we almost fail to notice the toll it takes,on every aspect of our lives --,on our health, our diet, our work,,our relationships, the environment and our community.,And sometimes it takes,a wake-up call, doesn't it,,to alert us to the fact that we're hurrying through our lives,,instead of actually living them; that we're,living the fast life, instead of the good life.,And I think for many people, that wake-up call,takes the form of an illness.,You know, a burnout, or eventually the body says,,"I can't take it anymore," and throws in the towel.,Or maybe a relationship goes up in smoke,because we haven't had the time, or the patience,,or the tranquility,,to be with the other person, to listen to them. 
 And my wake-up call came when I started,reading bedtime stories to my son,,and I found that at the end of day,,I would go into his room and I just couldn't slow down -- you know,,I'd be speed reading "The Cat In The Hat.",I'd be -- you know, I'd be skipping lines here,,paragraphs there, sometimes a whole page,,and of course, my little boy knew the book inside out, so we would quarrel.,And what should have been the most relaxing, the most intimate,,the most tender moment of the day,,when a dad sits down to read to his son,,became instead this kind of gladiatorial battle of wills,,a clash between my speed,and his slowness.,And this went on for some time,,until I caught myself scanning a newspaper article,with timesaving tips for fast people.,And one of them made reference to a series of books called,"The One-Minute Bedtime Story.",And I wince saying those words now,,but my first reaction at the time was very different.,My first reflex was to say,,"Hallelujah -- what a great idea!,This is exactly what I'm looking for to speed up bedtime even more.",But thankfully,,a light bulb went on over my head, and my next reaction was very different,,and I took a step back, and I thought,,"Whoa -- you know, has it really come to this?,Am I really in such a hurry that I'm prepared,to fob off my son with a sound byte at the end of the day?",And I put away the newspaper --,and I was getting on a plane -- and I sat there,,and I did something I hadn't done for a long time -- which is I did nothing.,I just thought, and I thought long and hard.,And by the time I got off that plane, I'd decided I wanted to do something about it.,I wanted to investigate this whole roadrunner culture,,and what it was doing to me and to everyone else. 
 And I had two questions in my head.,The first was, how did we get so fast?,And the second is, is it possible,,or even desirable, to slow down?,Now, if you think about,how our world got so accelerated, the usual suspects rear their heads.,You think of, you know, urbanization,,consumerism, the workplace, technology.,But I think if you cut through,those forces, you get to what might be the deeper,driver, the nub of the question,,which is how we think about time itself.,In other cultures, time is cyclical.,It's seen as moving in great,,unhurried circles.,It's always renewing and refreshing itself.,Whereas in the West, time is linear.,It's a finite resource;,it's always draining away.,You either use it, or lose it.,"Time is money," as Benjamin Franklin said.,And I think what that does to us psychologically,is it creates an equation.,Time is scarce, so what do we do?,Well -- well, we speed up, don't we?,We try and do more and more with less and less time.,We turn every moment of every day,into a race to the finish line --,a finish line, incidentally, that we never reach,,but a finish line nonetheless.,And I guess that the question is,,is it possible to break free from that mindset?,And thankfully, the answer is yes, because,what I discovered, when I began looking around, that there is,a global backlash against this culture that,tells us that faster is always better, and that busier is best. 
 Right across the world, people are doing the unthinkable:,they're slowing down, and finding that,,although conventional wisdom tells you that if you slow down, you're road kill,,the opposite turns out to be true:,that by slowing down at the right moments,,people find that they do everything better.,They eat better; they make love better; they exercise better;,they work better; they live better.,And, in this kind of cauldron,of moments and places and acts of deceleration,,lie what a lot of people now refer to as,the "International Slow Movement." 
 Now if you'll permit me a small act of hypocrisy,,I'll just give you a very quick overview of,what's going on inside the Slow Movement. If you think of food,,many of you will have heard of the Slow Food movement.,Started in Italy, but has spread across the world,,and now has 100,000 members,in 50 countries.,And it's driven by a very simple and sensible message,,which is that we get more pleasure and more health,from our food when we,cultivate, cook and consume it at a reasonable pace.,I think also the explosion of,the organic farming movement, and the renaissance of farmers' markets,,are other illustrations,of the fact that people are desperate to get away from,eating and cooking and cultivating their food,on an industrial timetable.,They want to get back to slower rhythms.,And out of the Slow Food movement has grown something,called the Slow Cities movement, which has started in Italy,,but has spread right across Europe and beyond.,And in this, towns,begin to rethink how they organize the urban landscape,,so that people are encouraged to slow down,and smell the roses and connect with one another.,So they might curb traffic,,or put in a park bench, or some green space. 
 And in some ways, these changes add up to more than the sum of their parts,,because I think when a Slow City becomes officially a Slow City,,it's kind of like a philosophical declaration.,It's saying to the rest of world, and to the people in that town,,that we believe that in the 21st century,,slowness has a role to play.,In medicine, I think a lot of people are deeply disillusioned,with the kind of quick-fix mentality,you find in conventional medicine.,And millions of them around the world are turning,to complementary and alternative forms of medicine,,which tend to tap into sort of,slower, gentler, more holistic forms of healing.,Now, obviously the jury is out on many of these complementary therapies,,and I personally doubt that the coffee enema,will ever, you know, gain mainstream approval.,But other treatments,such as acupuncture and massage, and even just relaxation,,clearly have some kind of benefit.,And blue-chip medical colleges everywhere,are starting to study these things to find out how they work,,and what we might learn from them. 
 Sex. There's an awful lot of fast sex around, isn't there?,I was coming to --,well -- no pun intended there.,I was making my way, let's say, slowly to Oxford,,and I went through a news agent, and I saw a magazine,,a men's magazine, and it said on the front,,"How to bring your partner to orgasm in 30 seconds.",So, you know, even sex,is on a stopwatch these days.,Now, you know,,I like a quickie as much as the next person,,but I think that there's an awful lot to be gained,from slow sex -- from slowing down in the bedroom.,You know, you tap into that -- those deeper,,sort of, psychological, emotional, spiritual currents,,and you get a better orgasm with the buildup.,You can get more bang for your buck, let's say.,I mean, the Pointer Sisters said it most eloquently, didn't they,,when they sang the praises of "a lover with a slow hand.",Now, we all laughed at Sting,a few years ago when he went Tantric,,but you fast-forward a few years, and now you find couples of all ages,flocking to workshops, or maybe just,on their own in their own bedrooms, finding ways,to put on the brakes and have better sex.,And of course, in Italy where -- I mean, Italians always seem to know,where to find their pleasure --,they've launched an official Slow Sex movement. 
 The workplace.,Right across much of the world --,North America being a notable exception --,working hours have been coming down.,And Europe is an example of that,,and people finding that their quality of life improves,as they're working less, and also,that their hourly productivity goes up.,Now, clearly there are problems with,the 35-hour workweek in France --,too much, too soon, too rigid.,But other countries in Europe, notably the Nordic countries,,are showing that it's possible,to have a kick-ass economy,without being a workaholic.,And Norway, Sweden,,Denmark and Finland now rank,among the top six most competitive nations on Earth,,and they work the kind of hours that would make the average American,weep with envy.,And if you go beyond sort of the country level,,down at the micro-company level,,more and more companies now are realizing,that they need to allow their staff,either to work fewer hours or just to unplug --,to take a lunch break, or to go sit in a quiet room,,to switch off their Blackberrys and laptops -- you at the back --,mobile phones,,during the work day or on the weekend, so that they have time to recharge,and for the brain to slide into that,kind of creative mode of thought. 
 It's not just, though, these days,,adults who overwork, though, is it? It's children, too.,I'm 37, and my childhood ended in the mid-'80s,,and I look at kids now, and I'm just amazed by the way they,race around with more homework,,more tutoring, more extracurriculars,than we would ever have conceived of a generation ago.,And some of the most heartrending emails,that I get on my website,are actually from adolescents,hovering on the edge of burnout, pleading with me,to write to their parents,,to help them slow down, to help them get off this,full-throttle treadmill.,But thankfully, there is a backlash there in parenting as well,,and you're finding that, you know, towns in the United States,are now banding together and banning extracurriculars,on a particular day of the month, so that people can,,you know, decompress and have some family time, and slow down. 
 Homework is another thing. There are homework bans,springing up all over the developed world,in schools which had been piling on the homework for years,,and now they're discovering that less can be more.,So there was a case up in Scotland recently,where a fee-paying, high-achieving private school,banned homework,for everyone under the age of 13,,and the high-achieving parents freaked out and said,,"What are you -- you know, our kids will fall" -- the headmaster said,,"No, no, your children need to slow down at the end of the day.",And just this last month, the exam results came in,,and in math, science, marks went up 20 percent,on average last year.,And I think what's very revealing is that,the elite universities, who are often cited as the reason,that people drive their kids and hothouse them so much,,are starting to notice the caliber of students,coming to them is falling. These kids have wonderful marks;,they have CVs jammed with extracurriculars,,to the point that would make your eyes water.,But they lack spark; they lack,the ability to think creatively and think outside --,they don't know how to dream. And so what these Ivy League schools,,and Oxford and Cambridge and so on, are starting to send a message,to parents and students that they need to put on the brakes a little bit.,And in Harvard, for instance, they send out,a letter to undergraduates -- freshmen --,telling them that they'll get more out of life, and more out of Harvard,,if they put on the brakes, if they do less,,but give time to things, the time that things need,,to enjoy them, to savor them.,And even if they sometimes do nothing at all.,And that letter is called -- very revealing, I think --,"Slow Down!" -- with an exclamation mark on the end. 
 So wherever you look, the message, it seems to me, is the same:,that less is very often more,,that slower is very often,better. But that said, of course,,it's not that easy to slow down, is it?,I mean, you heard that I got a speeding ticket,while I was researching my book on the benefits of slowness,,and that's true, but that's not all of it.,I was actually en route to a dinner,held by Slow Food at the time.,And if that's not shaming enough, I got that ticket in Italy.,And if any of you have ever driven on an Italian highway,,you'll have a pretty good idea of how fast I was going. 
 (Laughter) 
 But why is it so hard to slow down?,I think there are various reasons.,One is that speed is fun, you know, speed is sexy.,It's all that adrenaline rush. It's hard to give it up.,I think there's a kind of metaphysical dimension --,that speed becomes a way of walling ourselves off,from the bigger, deeper questions.,We fill our head with distraction, with busyness,,so that we don't have to ask,,am I well? Am I happy? Are my children growing up right?,Are politicians making good decisions on my behalf?,Another reason -- although I think, perhaps, the most powerful reason --,why we find it hard to slow down is the cultural taboo,that we've erected against slowing down.,"Slow" is a dirty word in our culture.,It's a byword for "lazy," "slacker,",for being somebody who gives up.,You know, "he's a bit slow." It's actually synonymous,with being stupid. 
 I guess what the Slow Movement -- the purpose of the Slow Movement,,or its main goal, really, is to tackle that taboo,,and to say that yes,,sometimes slow is not the answer,,that there is such a thing as "bad slow.",You know, I got stuck on the M25,,which is a ring road around London, recently,,and spent three-and-a-half hours there. And I can tell you,,that's really bad slow.,But the new idea,,the sort of revolutionary idea, of the Slow Movement,,is that there is such a thing as "good slow," too.,And good slow is, you know, taking the time,to eat a meal with your family, with the TV switched off.,Or taking the time to look at a problem from all angles,in the office to make the best decision,at work.,Or even simply just taking the time,to slow down,and savor your life. 
 Now, one of the things that I found most uplifting,about all of this stuff that's happened around the book,since it came out, is the reaction to it.,And I knew that when my book on slowness came out,,it would be welcomed by the New Age brigade,,but it's also been taken up, with great gusto,,by the corporate world -- you know,,business press, but also,big companies and leadership organizations.,Because people at the top of the chain, people like you, I think,,are starting to realize that there's too much,speed in the system,,there's too much busyness, and it's time to find,,or get back to that lost art of shifting gears.,Another encouraging sign, I think,,is that it's not just in the developed world,that this idea's been taken up. In the developing world,,in countries that are on the verge of making that leap,into first world status -- China, Brazil,,Thailand, Poland, and so on --,these countries have embraced the idea of the Slow Movement,,many people in them, and there's a debate going on,in their media, on the streets.,Because I think they're looking at the West, and they're saying,,"Well, we like that aspect of what you've got,,but we're not so sure about that." 
 So all of that said, is it,,I guess, is it possible?,That's really the main question before us today. Is it possible,to slow down? And,I'm happy to be able to say to you,that the answer is a resounding yes.,And I present myself as Exhibit A,,a kind of reformed and rehabilitated,speed-aholic.,I still love speed. You know, I live in London,,and I work as a journalist,,and I enjoy the buzz and the busyness,,and the adrenaline rush that comes from both of those things.,I play squash and ice hockey,,two very fast sports, and I wouldn't give them up for the world.,But I've also, over the last year or so,,got in touch with my inner tortoise. 
 (Laughter) 
 And what that means is that,I no longer,overload myself gratuitously.,My default mode is no longer,to be a rush-aholic.,I no longer hear,time's winged chariot drawing near,,or at least not as much as I did before.,I can actually hear it now, because I see my time is ticking off.,And the upshot of all of that is that,I actually feel a lot happier, healthier,,more productive than I ever have.,I feel like I'm living,my life rather than actually just racing through it.,And perhaps, the most important,measure of the success of this,is that I feel that my relationships are a lot deeper,,richer, stronger. 
 And for me, I guess, the litmus test,for whether this would work, and what it would mean,,was always going to be bedtime stories, because that's sort of where,the journey began. And there too the news is,rosy. You know,,at the end of the day, I go into my son's room.,I don't wear a watch. I switch off my computer,,so I can't hear the email pinging into the basket,,and I just slow down to his pace and we read.,And because children have their own tempo and internal clock,,they don't do quality time,,where you schedule 10 minutes for them to open up to you.,They need you to move at their rhythm.,I find that 10 minutes into a story, you know,,my son will suddenly say, "You know,,something happened in the playground today that really bothered me.",And we'll go off and have a conversation on that.,And I now find that bedtime stories,used to be,a box on my to-do list, something that I dreaded,,because it was so slow and I had to get through it quickly.,It's become my reward at the end of the day,,something I really cherish.,And I have a kind of Hollywood ending,to my talk this afternoon,,which goes a little bit like this: 
 a few months ago, I was getting ready to go on,another book tour, and I had my bags packed.,I was downstairs by the front door, and I was waiting for a taxi,,and my son came down the stairs and,he'd made a card for me. And he was carrying it.,He'd gone and stapled two cards, very like these, together,,and put a sticker of his favorite,character, Tintin, on the front.,And he said to me,,or he handed this to me, and I read it,,and it said, "To Daddy, love Benjamin.",And I thought, "Aw, that's really sweet.,Is that a good luck on the book tour card?",And he said, "No, no, no, Daddy -- this is a card,for being the best story reader in the world.",And I thought, "Yeah, you know, this slowing down thing really does work." 
 Thank you very much.We all make decisions every day; we want to know,what the right thing is to do -- in domains from the financial,to the gastronomic to the professional to the romantic.,And surely, if somebody could really tell us how to do,exactly the right thing at all possible times,,that would be a tremendous gift. 
 It turns out that, in fact, the world was given this gift in 1738,by a Dutch polymath named Daniel Bernoulli.,And what I want to talk to you about today is what that gift is,,and I also want to explain to you why it is,that it hasn't made a damn bit of difference. 
 Now, this is Bernoulli's gift. This is a direct quote.,And if it looks like Greek to you, it's because, well, it's Greek.,But the simple English translation -- much less precise,,but it captures the gist of what Bernoulli had to say -- was this:,The expected value of any of our actions --,that is, the goodness that we can count on getting --,is the product of two simple things:,the odds that this action will allow us to gain something,,and the value of that gain to us. 
 In a sense, what Bernoulli was saying is,,if we can estimate and multiply these two things,,we will always know precisely how we should behave. 
 Now, this simple equation, even for those of you,who don't like equations, is something that you're quite used to.,Here's an example: if I were to tell you, let's play,a little coin toss game, and I'm going to flip a coin,,and if it comes up heads, I'm going to pay you 10 dollars,,but you have to pay four dollars for the privilege of playing with me,,most of you would say, sure, I'll take that bet. Because you know,that the odds of you winning are one half, the gain if you do is 10 dollars,,that multiplies to five, and that's more,than I'm charging you to play. So, the answer is, yes.,This is what statisticians technically call a damn fine bet. 
 Now, the idea is simple when we're applying it to coin tosses,,but in fact, it's not very simple in everyday life.,People are horrible at estimating both of these things,,and that's what I want to talk to you about today. 
 There are two kinds of errors people make when trying to decide,what the right thing is to do, and those are,errors in estimating the odds that they're going to succeed,,and errors in estimating the value of their own success.,Now, let me talk about the first one first.,Calculating odds would seem to be something rather easy:,there are six sides to a die, two sides to a coin, 52 cards in a deck.,You all know what the likelihood is of pulling the ace of spades,or of flipping a heads.,But as it turns out, this is not a very easy idea to apply,in everyday life. That's why Americans spend more --,I should say, lose more -- gambling,than on all other forms of entertainment combined.,The reason is, this isn't how people do odds. 
 The way people figure odds,requires that we first talk a bit about pigs.,Now, the question I'm going to put to you is whether you think,there are more dogs or pigs on leashes,observed in any particular day in Oxford.,And of course, you all know that the answer is dogs.,And the way that you know that the answer is dogs is,you quickly reviewed in memory the times,you've seen dogs and pigs on leashes.,It was very easy to remember seeing dogs,,not so easy to remember pigs. And each one of you assumed,that if dogs on leashes came more quickly to your mind,,then dogs on leashes are more probable.,That's not a bad rule of thumb, except when it is. 
 So, for example, here's a word puzzle.,Are there more four-letter English words,with R in the third place or R in the first place?,Well, you check memory very briefly, make a quick scan,,and it's awfully easy to say to yourself, Ring, Rang, Rung,,and very hard to say to yourself, Pare, Park: they come more slowly.,But in fact, there are many more words in the English language,with R in the third than the first place.,The reason words with R in the third place come slowly to your mind,isn't because they're improbable, unlikely or infrequent.,It's because the mind recalls words by their first letter.,You kind of shout out the sound, S -- and the word comes.,It's like the dictionary;,it's hard to look things up by the third letter.,So, this is an example of how this idea that,the quickness with which things come to mind,can give you a sense of their probability -- 
 how this idea could lead you astray. It's not just puzzles, though.,For example, when Americans are asked to estimate the odds,that they will die in a variety of interesting ways --,these are estimates of number of deaths per year,per 200 million U.S. citizens.,And these are just ordinary people like yourselves who are asked,to guess how many people die from tornado, fireworks, asthma, drowning, etc.,Compare these to the actual numbers. 
 Now, you see a very interesting pattern here, which is first of all,,two things are vastly over-estimated, namely tornadoes and fireworks.,Two things are vastly underestimated:,dying by drowning and dying by asthma. Why?,When was the last time that you picked up a newspaper,and the headline was, "Boy dies of Asthma?",It's not interesting because it's so common.,It's very easy for all of us to bring to mind instances,of news stories or newsreels where we've seen,tornadoes devastating cities, or some poor schmuck,who's blown his hands off with a firework on the Fourth of July.,Drownings and asthma deaths don't get much coverage.,They don't come quickly to mind, and as a result,,we vastly underestimate them. 
 Indeed, this is kind of like the Sesame Street game,of "Which thing doesn't belong?" And you're right to say,it's the swimming pool that doesn't belong, because the swimming pool,is the only thing on this slide that's actually very dangerous.,The way that more of you are likely to die than the combination,of all three of the others that you see on the slide. 
 The lottery is an excellent example, of course -- an excellent test-case,of people's ability to compute probabilities.,And economists -- forgive me, for those of you who play the lottery --,but economists, at least among themselves, refer to the lottery,as a stupidity tax, because the odds of getting any payoff,by investing your money in a lottery ticket,are approximately equivalent to flushing the money,directly down the toilet -- which, by the way,,doesn't require that you actually go to the store and buy anything. 
 Why in the world would anybody ever play the lottery?,Well, there are many answers, but one answer surely is,,we see a lot of winners. Right? When this couple wins the lottery,,or Ed McMahon shows up at your door with this giant check --,how the hell do you cash things that size, I don't know.,We see this on TV; we read about it in the paper.,When was the last time that you saw extensive interviews,with everybody who lost?,Indeed, if we required that television stations run,a 30-second interview with each loser,every time they interview a winner, the 100 million losers,in the last lottery would require nine-and-a-half years,of your undivided attention just to watch them say,,"Me? I lost." "Me? I lost.",Now, if you watch nine-and-a-half years of television --,no sleep, no potty breaks -- and you saw loss after loss after loss,,and then at the end there's 30 seconds of, "and I won,",the likelihood that you would play the lottery is very small. 
 Look, I can prove this to you: here's a little lottery.,There's 10 tickets in this lottery.,Nine of them have been sold to these individuals.,It costs you a dollar to buy the ticket and, if you win,,you get 20 bucks. Is this a good bet?,Well, Bernoulli tells us it is.,The expected value of this lottery is two dollars;,this is a lottery in which you should invest your money.,And most people say, "OK, I'll play." 
 Now, a slightly different version of this lottery:,imagine that the nine tickets are all owned,by one fat guy named Leroy.,Leroy has nine tickets; there's one left.,Do you want it? Most people won't play this lottery.,Now, you can see the odds of winning haven't changed,,but it's now fantastically easy to imagine who's going to win.,It's easy to see Leroy getting the check, right?,You can't say to yourself, "I'm as likely to win as anybody,",because you're not as likely to win as Leroy.,The fact that all those tickets are owned by one guy,changes your decision to play,,even though it does nothing whatsoever to the odds. 
 Now, estimating odds, as difficult as it may seem, is a piece of cake,compared to trying to estimate value:,trying to say what something is worth, how much we'll enjoy it,,how much pleasure it will give us.,I want to talk now about errors in value.,How much is this Big Mac worth? Is it worth 25 dollars?,Most of you have the intuition that it's not --,you wouldn't pay that for it. 
 But in fact, to decide whether a Big Mac is worth 25 dollars requires,that you ask one, and only one question, which is:,What else can I do with 25 dollars?,If you've ever gotten on one of those long-haul flights to Australia,and realized that they're not going to serve you any food,,but somebody in the row in front of you has just opened,the McDonald's bag, and the smell of golden arches,is wafting over the seat, you think,,I can't do anything else with this 25 dollars for 16 hours.,I can't even set it on fire -- they took my cigarette lighter!,Suddenly, 25 dollars for a Big Mac might be a good deal. 
 On the other hand, if you're visiting an underdeveloped country,,and 25 dollars buys you a gourmet meal, it's exorbitant for a Big Mac.,Why were you all sure that the answer to the question was no,,before I'd even told you anything about the context?,Because most of you compared the price of this Big Mac,to the price you're used to paying. Rather than asking,,"What else can I do with my money," comparing this investment,to other possible investments, you compared to the past.,And this is a systematic error people make.,What you knew is, you paid three dollars in the past; 25 is outrageous. 
 This is an error, and I can prove it to you by showing,the kinds of irrationalities to which it leads.,For example, this is, of course,,one of the most delicious tricks in marketing,,is to say something used to be higher,,and suddenly it seems like a very good deal.,When people are asked about these two different jobs:,a job where you make 60K, then 50K, then 40K,,a job where you're getting a salary cut each year,,and one in which you're getting a salary increase,,people like the second job better than the first, despite the fact,they're all told they make much less money. Why?,Because they had the sense that declining wages are worse,than rising wages, even when the total amount of wages is higher,in the declining period. Here's another nice example. 
 Here's a $2,000 Hawaiian vacation package; it's now on sale for 1,600.,Assuming you wanted to go to Hawaii, would you buy this package?,Most people say they would. Here's a slightly different story:,$2,000 Hawaiian vacation package is now on sale for 700 dollars,,so you decide to mull it over for a week.,By the time you get to the ticket agency, the best fares are gone --,the package now costs 1,500. Would you buy it? Most people say, no.,Why? Because it used to cost 700, and there's no way I'm paying 1,500,for something that was 700 last week. 
 This tendency to compare to the past,is causing people to pass up the better deal. In other words,,a good deal that used to be a great deal is not nearly as good,as an awful deal that was once a horrible deal. 
 Here's another example of how comparing to the past,can befuddle our decisions.,Imagine that you're going to the theater.,You're on your way to the theater.,In your wallet you have a ticket, for which you paid 20 dollars.,You also have a 20-dollar bill.,When you arrive at the theater,,you discover that somewhere along the way you've lost the ticket.,Would you spend your remaining money on replacing it?,Most people answer, no.,Now, let's just change one thing in this scenario.,You're on your way to the theater,,and in your wallet you have two 20-dollar bills.,When you arrive you discover you've lost one of them.,Would you spend your remaining 20 dollars on a ticket?,Well, of course, I went to the theater to see the play.,What does the loss of 20 dollars along the way have to do? 
 Now, just in case you're not getting it,,here's a schematic of what happened, OK?,(Laughter),Along the way, you lost something.,In both cases, it was a piece of paper.,In one case, it had a U.S. president on it; in the other case it didn't.,What the hell difference should it make?,The difference is that when you lost the ticket you say to yourself,,I'm not paying twice for the same thing.,You compare the cost of the play now -- 40 dollars --,to the cost that it used to have -- 20 dollars -- and you say it's a bad deal.,Comparing with the past causes many of the problems,that behavioral economists and psychologists identify,in people's attempts to assign value.,But even when we compare with the possible, instead of the past,,we still make certain kinds of mistakes.,And I'm going to show you one or two of them. 
 One of the things we know about comparison:,that when we compare one thing to the other, it changes its value.,So in 1992, this fellow, George Bush, for those of us who were,kind of on the liberal side of the political spectrum,,didn't seem like such a great guy.,Suddenly, we're almost longing for him to return.,(Laughter),The comparison changes how we evaluate him. 
 Now, retailers knew this long before anybody else did, of course,,and they use this wisdom to help you --,spare you the undue burden of money.,And so a retailer, if you were to go into a wine shop,and you had to buy a bottle of wine,,and you see them here for eight, 27 and 33 dollars, what would you do?,Most people don't want the most expensive,,they don't want the least expensive.,So, they will opt for the item in the middle.,If you're a smart retailer, then, you will put a very expensive item,that nobody will ever buy on the shelf,,because suddenly the $33 wine doesn't look as expensive in comparison. 
 So I'm telling you something you already knew:,namely, that comparison changes the value of things.,Here's why that's a problem:,the problem is that when you get that $33 bottle of wine home,,it won't matter what it used to be sitting on the shelf next to.,The comparisons we make when we are appraising value,,where we're trying to estimate how much we'll like things,,are not the same comparisons we'll be making when we consume them.,This problem of shifting comparisons can bedevil,our attempts to make rational decisions. 
 Let me just give you an example.,I have to show you something from my own lab, so let me sneak this in.,These are subjects coming to an experiment to be asked,the simplest of all questions:,How much will you enjoy eating potato chips one minute from now?,They're sitting in a room with potato chips in front of them.,For some of the subjects, sitting in the far corner of a room,is a box of Godiva chocolates, and for others is a can of Spam.,In fact, these items that are sitting in the room change,how much the subjects think they're going to enjoy the potato chips.,Namely, those who are looking at Spam,think potato chips are going to be quite tasty;,those who are looking at Godiva chocolate,think they won't be nearly so tasty.,Of course, what happens when they eat the potato chips?,Well, look, you didn't need a psychologist to tell you that,when you have a mouthful of greasy, salty, crispy, delicious snacks,,what's sitting in the corner of the room,makes not a damn bit of difference to your gustatory experience.,Nonetheless, their predictions are perverted by a comparison,that then does not carry through and change their experience. 
 You've all experienced this yourself, even if you've never come,into our lab to eat potato chips. So here's a question:,You want to buy a car stereo.,The dealer near your house sells this particular stereo for 200 dollars,,but if you drive across town, you can get it for 100 bucks.,So would you drive to get 50 percent off, saving 100 dollars?,Most people say they would.,They can't imagine buying it for twice the price,when, with one trip across town, they can get it for half off. 
 Now, let's imagine instead you wanted to buy a car that had a stereo,,and the dealer near your house had it for 31,000.,But if you drove across town, you could get it for 30,900.,Would you drive to get it? At this point, 0.003 savings -- the 100 dollars.,Most people say, no, I'm going to schlep across town,to save 100 bucks on the purchase of a car? 
 This kind of thinking drives economists crazy, and it should.,Because this 100 dollars that you save -- hello! --,doesn't know where it came from.,It doesn't know what you saved it on.,When you go to buy groceries with it, it doesn't go,,I'm the money saved on the car stereo, or,,I'm the dumb money saved on the car. It's money.,And if a drive across town is worth 100 bucks, it's worth 100 bucks,no matter what you're saving it on. People don't think that way.,That's why they don't know whether their mutual fund manager,is taking 0.1 percent or 0.15 percent of their investment,,but they clip coupons to save one dollar off of toothpaste. 
 Now, you can see, this is the problem of shifting comparisons,,because what you're doing is, you're comparing the 100 bucks,to the purchase that you're making,,but when you go to spend that money you won't be making that comparison.,You've all had this experience. 
 If you're an American, for example, you've probably traveled in France.,And at some point you may have met a couple,from your own hometown, and you thought,,"Oh, my God, these people are so warm. They're so nice to me.,I mean, compared to all these people who hate me,when I try to speak their language and hate me more when I don't,,these people are just wonderful." And so you tour France with them,,and then you get home and you invite them over for dinner,,and what do you find?,Compared to your regular friends,,they are boring and dull, right? Because in this new context,,the comparison is very, very different. In fact, you find yourself,disliking them enough almost to qualify for French citizenship. 
 Now, you have exactly the same problem when you shop for a stereo.,You go to the stereo store, you see two sets of speakers --,these big, boxy, monoliths, and these little, sleek speakers,,and you play them, and you go, you know, I do hear a difference:,the big ones sound a little better.,And so you buy them, and you bring them home,,and you entirely violate the dcor of your house.,And the problem, of course, is that this comparison you made in the store,is a comparison you'll never make again.,What are the odds that years later you'll turn on the stereo and go,,"Sounds so much better than those little ones,",which you can't even remember hearing. 
 The problem of shifting comparisons is even more difficult,when these choices are arrayed over time.,People have a lot of trouble making decisions,about things that will happen at different points in time.,And what psychologists and behavioral economists have discovered,is that by and large people use two simple rules.,So let me give you one very easy problem, a second very easy problem,and then a third, hard, problem. 
 Here's the first easy problem:,You can have 60 dollars now or 50 dollars now. Which would you prefer?,This is what we call a one-item IQ test, OK?,All of us, I hope, prefer more money, and the reason is,,we believe more is better than less. 
 Here's the second problem:,You can have 60 dollars today or 60 dollars in a month. Which would you prefer?,Again, an easy decision,,because we all know that now is better than later.,What's hard in our decision-making is when these two rules conflict.,For example, when you're offered 50 dollars now or 60 dollars in a month.,This typifies a lot of situations in life in which you will gain,by waiting, but you have to be patient.,What do we know? What do people do in these kinds of situations?,Well, by and large people are enormously impatient.,That is, they require interest rates in the hundred,or thousands of percents in order to delay gratification,and wait until next month for the extra 10 dollars.,Maybe that isn't so remarkable, but what is remarkable is,how easy it is to make this impatience go away by simply changing,when the delivery of these monetary units will happen.,Imagine that you can have 50 dollars in a year -- that's 12 months --,or 60 dollars in 13 months.,What do we find now?,People are gladly willing to wait: as long as they're waiting 12,,they might as well wait 13. 
 What makes this dynamic inconsistency happen?,Comparison. Troubling comparison. Let me show you. 
 This is just a graph showing the results that I just suggested,you would show if I gave you time to respond, which is,,people find that the subjective value of 50 is higher,than the subjective value of 60 when they'll be delivered in now,or one month, respectively -- a 30-day delay --,but they show the reverse pattern when you push the entire decision,off into the future a year.,Now, why in the world do you get this pattern of results? 
 These guys can tell us.,What you see here are two lads,,one of them larger than the other: the fireman and the fiddler.,They are going to recede towards the vanishing point in the horizon,,and I want you to notice two things.,At no point will the fireman look taller than the fiddler. No point.,However, the difference between them seems to be getting smaller.,First it's an inch in your view, then it's a quarter-inch,,then a half-inch, and then finally they go off the edge of the earth. 
 Here are the results of what I just showed you.,This is the subjective height --,the height you saw of these guys at various points.,And I want you to see that two things are true.,One, the farther away they are, the smaller they look;,and two, the fireman is always bigger than the fiddler.,But watch what happens when we make some of them disappear. Right.,At a very close distance, the fiddler looks taller than the fireman,,but at a far distance,their normal, their true, relations are preserved.,As Plato said, what space is to size, time is to value.,These are the results of the hard problem I gave you:,60 now or 50 in a month?,And these are subjective values,,and what you can see is, our two rules are preserved. 
 People always think more is better than less:,60 is always better than 50,,and they always think now is better than later:,the bars on this side are higher than the bars on this side.,Watch what happens when we drop some out.,Suddenly we have the dynamic inconsistency that puzzled us.,We have the tendency for people to go for 50 dollars now,over waiting a month, but not if that decision is far in the future.,Notice something interesting that this implies -- namely, that,when people get to the future, they will change their minds.,That is, as that month 12 approaches, you will say,,what was I thinking, waiting an extra month for 60 dollars?,I'll take the 50 dollars now. 
 Well, the question with which I'd like to end is this:,If we're so damn stupid, how did we get to the moon?,Because I could go on for about two hours with evidence,of people's inability to estimate odds and inability to estimate value. 
 The answer to this question, I think, is an answer you've already heard,in some of the talks, and I dare say you will hear again:,namely, that our brains were evolved for a very different world,than the one in which we are living.,They were evolved for a world,in which people lived in very small groups,,rarely met anybody who was terribly different from themselves,,had rather short lives in which there were few choices,and the highest priority was to eat and mate today. 
 Bernoulli's gift, Bernoulli's little formula, allows us, it tells us,how we should think in a world for which nature never designed us.,That explains why we are so bad at using it, but it also explains,why it is so terribly important that we become good, fast.,We are the only species on this planet,that has ever held its own fate in its hands.,We have no significant predators,,we're the masters of our physical environment;,the things that normally cause species to become extinct,are no longer any threat to us.,The only thing -- the only thing -- that can destroy us and doom us,are our own decisions.,If we're not here in 10,000 years, it's going to be because,we could not take advantage of the gift given to us,by a young Dutch fellow in 1738,,because we underestimated the odds of our future pains,and overestimated the value of our present pleasures. 
 Thank you.,(Applause) 
 Chris Anderson: That was remarkable.,We have time for some questions for Dan Gilbert. One and two. 
 Bill Lyell: Would you say that this mechanism,is in part how terrorism actually works to frighten us,,and is there some way that we could counteract that? 
 Dan Gilbert: I actually was consulting recently,with the Department of Homeland Security, which generally believes,that American security dollars should go to making borders safer.,I tried to point out to them that terrorism was a name,based on people's psychological reaction to a set of events,,and that if they were concerned about terrorism they might ask,what causes terror and how can we stop people from being terrified,,rather than -- not rather than, but in addition to,stopping the atrocities that we're all concerned about.,Surely the kinds of play that at least American media give to --,and forgive me, but in raw numbers these are very tiny accidents.,We already know, for example, in the United States,,more people have died as a result of not taking airplanes --,because they were scared -- and driving on highways,,than were killed in 9/11. OK?,If I told you that there was a plague,that was going to kill 15,000 Americans next year,,you might be alarmed if you didn't find out it was the flu.,These are small-scale accidents, and we should be wondering,whether they should get the kind of play,,the kind of coverage, that they do.,Surely that causes people to overestimate the likelihood,that they'll be hurt in these various ways,,and gives power to the very people who want to frighten us. 
 CA: Dan, I'd like to hear more on this. So, you're saying,that our response to terror is, I mean, it's a form of mental bug?,Talk more about it. 
 DG: It's out-sized. I mean, look.,If Australia disappears tomorrow,,terror is probably the right response.,That's an awful large lot of very nice people. On the other hand,,when a bus blows up and 30 people are killed,,more people than that were killed,by not using their seatbelts in the same country.,Is terror the right response? 
 CA: What causes the bug? Is it the drama of the event --,that it's so spectacular?,Is it the fact that it's an intentional attack by, quote, outsiders?,What is it? 
 DG: Yes. It's a number of things, and you hit on several of them.,First, it's a human agent trying to kill us --,it's not a tree falling on us by accident.,Second, these are enemies who may want to strike and hurt us again.,People are being killed for no reason instead of good reason --,as if there's good reason, but sometimes people think there are.,So there are a number of things that together,make this seem like a fantastic event, but let's not play down,the fact that newspapers sell when people see something in it,they want to read. So there's a large role here played by the media,,who want these things to be,as spectacular as they possibly can. 
 CA: I mean, what would it take to persuade our culture to downplay it? 
 DG: Well, go to Israel. You know,,go to Israel. And a mall blows up,,and then everybody's unhappy about it, and an hour-and-a-half later --,at least when I was there, and I was 150 feet from the mall,when it blew up -- I went back to my hotel,and the wedding that was planned was still going on.,And as the Israeli mother said,,she said, "We never let them win by stopping weddings.",I mean, this is a society that has learned --,and there are others too -- that has learned to live,with a certain amount of terrorism and not be quite as upset by it,,shall I say, as those of us who have not had many terror attacks. 
 CA: But is there a rational fear that actually,,the reason we're frightened about this is because we think that,the Big One is to come? 
 DG: Yes, of course. So, if we knew that this was the worst attack,there would ever be, there might be more and more buses of 30 people --,we would probably not be nearly so frightened.,I don't want to say -- please, I'm going to get quoted somewhere,as saying, "Terrorism is fine and we shouldn't be so distressed.",That's not my point at all.,What I'm saying is that, surely, rationally,,our distress about things that happen, about threats,,should be roughly proportional to the size of those threats,and threats to come.,I think in the case of terrorism, it isn't.,And many of the things we've heard about from our speakers today --,how many people do you know got up and said,,Poverty! I can't believe what poverty is doing to us.,People get up in the morning; they don't care about poverty.,It's not making headlines, it's not making news, it's not flashy.,There are no guns going off.,I mean, if you had to solve one of these problems, Chris,,which would you solve? Terrorism or poverty?,(Laughter),(Applause),That's a tough one. 
 CA: There's no question.,Poverty, by an order of magnitude, a huge order of magnitude,,unless someone can show that there's, you know,,terrorists with a nuke are really likely to come.,The latest I've read, seen, thought,is that it's incredibly hard for them to do that.,If that turns out to be wrong, we all look silly,,but with poverty it's a bit -- 
 DG: Even if that were true, still more people die from poverty. 
 CA: We've evolved to get all excited,about these dramatic attacks. Is that because in the past,,in the ancient past, we just didn't understand things like disease,and systems that cause poverty and so forth,,and so it made no sense for us as a species to put any energy,into worrying about those things?,People died; so be it.,But if you got attacked, that was something you could do something about.,And so we evolved these responses.,Is that what happened? 
 DG: Well, you know, the people who are most skeptical,about leaping to evolutionary explanations for everything,are the evolutionary psychologists themselves.,My guess is that there's nothing quite that specific,in our evolutionary past. But rather, if you're looking for,an evolutionary explanation, you might say,that most organisms are neo-phobic -- that is, they're a little scared,of stuff that's new and different.,And there's a good reason to be,,because old stuff didn't eat you. Right?,Any animal you see that you've seen before is less likely,to be a predator than one that you've never seen before.,So, you know, when a school bus is blown up and we've never seen this before,,our general tendency is to orient towards,that which is new and novel is activated.,I don't think it's quite as specific a mechanism,as the one you alluded to, but maybe a more fundamental one underlying it. 
 Jay Walker: You know, economists love to talk about,the stupidity of people who buy lottery tickets. But I suspect,you're making the exact same error you're accusing those people of,,which is the error of value.,I know, because I've interviewed,about 1,000 lottery buyers over the years.,It turns out that the value of buying a lottery ticket is not winning.,That's what you think it is. All right?,The average lottery buyer buys about 150 tickets a year,,so the buyer knows full well that he or she is going to lose,,and yet she buys 150 tickets a year. Why is that?,It's not because she is stupid or he is stupid.,It's because the anticipation of possibly winning,releases serotonin in the brain, and actually provides a good feeling,until the drawing indicates you've lost.,Or, to put it another way, for the dollar investment,,you can have a much better feeling than flushing the money,down the toilet, which you cannot have a good feeling from.,Now, economists tend to --,(Applause),-- economists tend to view the world,through their own lenses, which is:,this is just a bunch of stupid people.,And as a result, many people look at economists as stupid people.,And so fundamentally, the reason we got to the moon is,,we didn't listen to the economists. Thank you very much.,(Applause) 
 DG: Well, no, it's a great point. It remains to be seen,whether the joy of anticipation is exactly equaled,by the amount of disappointment after the lottery. Because remember,,people who didn't buy tickets don't feel awful the next day either,,even though they don't feel great during the drawing.,I would disagree that people know they're not going to win.,I think they think it's unlikely, but it could happen,,which is why they prefer that to the flushing.,But certainly I see your point: that there can be,some utility to buying a lottery ticket other than winning.,Now, I think there's many good reasons not to listen to economists.,That isn't one of them, for me, but there's many others. 
 CA: Last question. 
 Aubrey de Grey: My name's Aubrey de Grey, from Cambridge.,I work on the thing that kills more people than anything else kills --,I work on aging -- and I'm interested in doing something about it,,as we'll all hear tomorrow.,I very much resonate with what you're saying,,because it seems to me that the problem,with getting people interested in doing anything about aging,is that by the time aging is about to kill you it looks like cancer,or heart disease or whatever. Do you have any advice?,(Laughter) 
 DG: For you or for them? 
 AdG: In persuading them. 
 DG: Ah, for you in persuading them.,Well, it's notoriously difficult to get people to be farsighted.,But one thing that psychologists have tried that seems to work,is to get people to imagine the future more vividly.,One of the problems with making decisions about the far future,and the near future is that we imagine the near future,much more vividly than the far future.,To the extent that you can equalize the amount of detail,that people put into the mental representations,of near and far future, people begin to make decisions,about the two in the same way.,So, would you like to have an extra 100,000 dollars when you're 65,is a question that's very different than,,imagine who you'll be when you're 65: will you be living,,what will you look like, how much hair will you have,,who will you be living with.,Once we have all the details of that imaginary scenario,,suddenly we feel like it might be important to save,so that that guy has a little retirement money.,But these are tricks around the margins.,I think in general you're battling a very fundamental human tendency,,which is to say, "I'm here today,,and so now is more important than later." 
 CA: Dan, thank you. Members of the audience,,that was a fantastic session. Thank you.,(Applause)I think it'll be a relief to some people and a disappointment to others,that I'm not going to talk about vaginas today.,I began "The Vagina Monologues" because I was worried about vaginas.,I'm very worried today about this notion, this world,,this prevailing kind of force of security.,I see this word, hear this word, feel this word everywhere.,Real security, security checks, security watch, security clearance.,Why has all this focus on security made me feel so much more insecure?,What does anyone mean when they talk about real security?,And why have we, as Americans particularly,,become a nation that strives for security above all else?,In fact, I think that security is elusive. It's impossible.,We all die. We all get old. We all get sick. People leave us.,People change us. Nothing is secure.,And that's actually the good news. 
 This is, of course, unless your whole life is about being secure.,I think that when that is the focus of your life,,these are the things that happen.,You can't travel very far or venture too far outside a certain circle.,You can't allow too many conflicting ideas into your mind at one time,,as they might confuse you or challenge you.,You can't open yourself to new experiences, new people,,new ways of doing things -- they might take you off course.,You can't not know who you are, so you cling to hard-matter identity.,You become a Christian, Muslim, Jew.,You're an Indian, Egyptian, Italian, American.,You're a heterosexual or a homosexual, or you never have sex.,Or at least, that's what you say when you identify yourself.,You become part of an "us.",In order to be secure, you defend against "them.",You cling to your land because it is your secure place.,You must fight anyone who encroaches upon it.,You become your nation. You become your religion.,You become whatever it is that will freeze you, numb you,and protect you from doubt or change.,But all this does, actually, is shut down your mind.,In reality, it does not really make you safer. 
 I was in Sri Lanka, for example, three days after the tsunami,,and I was standing on the beaches,and it was absolutely clear that, in a matter of five minutes,,a 30-foot wave could rise up,and desecrate a people, a population and lives.,All this striving for security, in fact,,has made you much more insecure,because now you have to watch out all the time.,There are people not like you -- people who you now call enemies.,You have places you cannot go, thoughts you cannot think,,worlds that you can no longer inhabit.,And so you spend your days fighting things off, defending your territory,and becoming more entrenched in your fundamental thinking.,Your days become devoted to protecting yourself.,This becomes your mission. That is all you do.,Ideas get shorter. They become sound bytes.,There are evildoers and saints, criminals and victims. 
 There are those who, if they're not with us, are against us.,It gets easier to hurt people because you do not feel what's inside them.,It gets easier to lock them up, force them to be naked, humiliate them,,occupy them, invade them and kill them,,because they are only obstacles now to your security.,In six years, I've had the extraordinary privilege through V-Day,,a global movement against [violence against] women,,to travel probably to 60 countries,,and spend a great deal of time in different portions.,I've met women and men all over this planet,,who through various circumstances --,war, poverty, racism, multiple forms of violence --,have never known security,,or have had their illusion of security forever devastated.,I've spent time with women in Afghanistan under the Taliban,,who were essentially brutalized and censored.,I've been in Bosnian refugee camps.,I was with women in Pakistan,who have had their faces melted off with acid.,I've been with girls all across America who were date-raped,,or raped by their best friends when they were drugged one night. 
 One of the amazing things that I've discovered in my travels,is that there is this emerging species.,I loved when he was talking about this other world that's right next to this world.,I've discovered these people, who, in V-Day world,,we call Vagina Warriors.,These particular people, rather than getting AK-47s,,or weapons of mass destruction, or machetes,,in the spirit of the warrior, have gone into the center, the heart of pain, of loss.,They have grieved it, they have died into it,,and allowed and encouraged poison to turn into medicine.,They have used the fuel of their pain to begin to redirect that energy,towards another mission and another trajectory. 
 These warriors now devote themselves and their lives,to making sure what happened to them doesn't happen to anyone else.,There are thousands if not millions of them on the planet.,I venture there are many in this room.,They have a fierceness and a freedom,that I believe is the bedrock of a new paradigm.,They have broken out of the existing frame of victim and perpetrator.,Their own personal security is not their end goal,,and because of that, because, rather than worrying about security,,because the transformation of suffering is their end goal,,I actually believe they are creating real safety,and a whole new idea of security.,I want to talk about a few of these people that I've met. 
 Tomorrow, I am going to Cairo,,and I'm so moved that I will be with women in Cairo,who are V-Day women, who are opening the first safe house,for battered women in the Middle East.,That will happen because women in Cairo made a decision to stand up,and put themselves on the line,,and talk about the degree of violence that is happening in Egypt,,and were willing to be attacked and criticized.,And through their work over the last years,,this is not only happening that this house is opening,,but it's being supported by many factions of the society,who never would have supported it.,Women in Uganda this year,,who put on "The Vagina Monologues" during V-Day,,actually evoked the wrath of the government. 
 And, I love this story so much.,There was a cabinet meeting and a meeting of the presidents,to talk about whether "Vaginas" could come to Uganda.,And in this meeting -- it went on for weeks in the press,,two weeks where there was huge discussion.,The government finally made a decision,that "The Vagina Monologues" could not be performed in Uganda.,But the amazing news was that because they had stood up, these women,,and because they had been willing to risk their security,,it began a discussion that not only happened in Uganda,,but all of Africa.,As a result, this production, which had already sold out,,every single person in that 800-seat audience, except for 10 people,,made a decision to keep the money.,They raised 10,000 dollars on a production that never occurred. 
 There's a young woman named Carrie Rethlefsen in Minnesota.,She's a high school student.,She had seen "The Vagina Monologues" and she was really moved. And as a result,,she wore an "I heart my vagina" button to her high school in Minnesota. 
 (Laughter) 
 She was basically threatened to be expelled from school.,They told her she couldn't love her vagina in high school,,that it was not a legal thing, that it was not a moral thing,,that it was not a good thing.,So she really struggled with this, what to do,,because she was a senior and she was doing well in her school,and she was threatened expulsion. So what she did is she got all her friends together --,I believe it was 100, 150 students,all wore "I love my vagina" T-shirts,,and the boys wore "I love her vagina" T-shirts to school. 
 (Laughter) 
 Now this seems like a fairly, you know, frivolous,,but what happened as a result of that, is that that school now,is forming a sex education class. It's beginning to talk about sex,,it's beginning to look at why it would be wrong,for a young high school girl to talk about her vagina publicly,or to say that she loved her vagina publicly. 
 I know I've talked about Agnes here before,,but I want to give you an update on Agnes.,I met Agnes three years ago in the Rift Valley.,When she was a young girl, she had been mutilated against her will.,That mutilation of her clitoris,had actually obviously impacted her life,and changed it in a way that was devastating.,She made a decision not to go and get a razor or a glass shard,,but to devote her life to stopping that happening to other girls.,For eight years, she walked through the Rift Valley.,She had this amazing box that she carried and it had a,torso of a woman's body in it, a half a torso,,and she would teach people, everywhere she went,,what a healthy vagina looked like and what a mutilated vagina looked like.,In the years that she walked, she educated parents, mothers, fathers.,She saved 1,500 girls from being cut. 
 When V-Day met her, we asked her how we could support her,and she said, "Well, if you got me a Jeep,,I could get around a lot faster." So, we bought her a Jeep.,In the year she had the Jeep, she saved 4,500 girls from being cut.,So, we said, what else could we do?,She said, "If you help me get money, I could open a house.",Three years ago, Agnes opened a safe house in Africa to stop mutilation.,When she began her mission eight years ago, she was reviled,,she was detested, she was completely slandered in her community.,I am proud to tell you that six months ago,,she was elected the deputy mayor of Narok. 
 (Applause) 
 I think what I'm trying to say here,is that if your end goal is security,,and if that's all you're focusing on, what ends up happening,is that you create not only more insecurity in other people,,but you make yourself far more insecure.,Real security is contemplating death, not pretending it doesn't exist.,Not running from loss, but entering grief, surrendering to sorrow.,Real security is not knowing something, when you don't know it.,Real security is hungering for connection rather than power.,It cannot be bought or arranged or made with bombs.,It is deeper, it is a process, it is acute awareness,that we are all utterly inter-bended,,and one action by one being in one tiny town,has consequences everywhere.,Real security is not only being able,to tolerate mystery, complexity, ambiguity, but hungering for them,and only trusting a situation when they are present. 
 Something happened when I began traveling in V-Day, eight years ago. I got lost.,I remember being on a plane going from Kenya to South Africa,,and I had no idea where I was.,I didn't know where I was going, where I'd come from,,and I panicked. I had a total anxiety attack.,And then I suddenly realized that it absolutely didn't matter,where I was going, or where I had come from,because we are all essentially permanently displaced people.,All of us are refugees.,We come from somewhere and we are hopefully traveling all the time,,moving towards a new place.,Freedom means I may not be identified as any one group,,but that I can visit and find myself in every group.,It does not mean that I don't have values or beliefs,,but it does mean I am not hardened around them.,I do not use them as weapons.,In the shared future, it will be just that, shared.,The end goal will [be] becoming vulnerable,,realizing the place of our connection to one another,,rather than becoming secure, in control and alone.,Thank you very much. 
 (Applause) 
 Chris Anderson: And how are you doing? Are you exhausted?,On a typical day, do you wake up with hope or gloom?,Eve Ensler: You know, I think Carl Jung once said,that in order to survive the twentieth century,,we have to live with two existing thoughts, opposite thoughts, at the same time.,And I think part of what I'm learning in this process,is that one must allow oneself to feel grief.,And I think as long as I keep grieving, and weeping,,and then moving on, I'm fine.,When I start to pretend that what I'm seeing isn't impacting me,,and isn't changing my heart, then I get in trouble.,Because when you spend a lot of time going from place to place,,country to country, and city to city,,the degree to which women, for example, are violated,,and the epidemic of it, and the kind of ordinariness of it,,is so devastating to one's soul that you have to take the time,,or I have to take the time now, to process that. 
 CA: There are a lot of causes out there in the world that have been talked about,,you know, poverty, sickness and so on. You spent eight years on this one.,Why this one?,EE: I think that if you think about women,,women are the primary resource of the planet. They give birth,,we come from them, they are mothers, they are visionaries,,they are the future. If you think that the U.N. now says,that one out of three women on the planet,will be raped or beaten in their lifetime,,we're talking about the desecration of the primary resource of the planet,,we're talking about the place where we come from, we're talking about parenting.,Imagine that you've been raped and you're bringing up a boy child.,How does it impact your ability to work, or envision a future,,or thrive, as opposed to just survive? What I believe is,if we could figure out how to make women safe and honor women,,it would be parallel or equal to honoring life itself.My mission in life since I was a kid was,,and is, to take the rest of you into space.,It's during our lifetime that we're going to take the Earth,,take the people of Earth and transition off, permanently. And that's exciting.,In fact, I think it is a moral imperative,that we open the space frontier.,You know, it's the first time that we're going to have a chance,to have planetary redundancy,,a chance to, if you would, back up the biosphere.,And if you think about space,,everything we hold of value on this planet --,metals and minerals and real estate and energy -- is in infinite quantities in space. 
 In fact, the Earth is a crumb in a supermarket filled with resources.,The analogy for me is Alaska. You know, we bought Alaska.,We Americans bought Alaska in the 1850s. It's called Seward's folly.,We valued it as the number of seal pelts we could kill.,And then we discovered these things -- gold and oil and fishing and timber --,and it became, you know, a trillion-dollar economy,,and now we take our honeymoons there. The same thing will happen in space.,We are on the verge of the greatest exploration,that the human race has ever known. 
 We explore for three reasons,,the weakest of which is curiosity.,You know, it's funded NASA's budget up until now.,Some images from Mars, 1997.,In fact, I think in the next decade, without any question,,we will discover life on Mars and find that it is literally ubiquitous,under the soils and different parts of that planet. 
 The stronger motivator, the much stronger motivator, is fear.,It drove us to the moon. We -- literally in fear -- with the Soviet Union,raced to the moon. And we have these huge rocks,,you know, killer-sized rocks in the hundreds of thousands or millions out there,,and while the probability is very small,,the impact, figured in literally,,of one of these hitting the Earth is so huge,that to spend a small fraction looking, searching,,preparing to defend, is not unreasonable. 
 And of course, the third motivator,,one near and dear to my heart as an entrepreneur, is wealth.,In fact, the greatest wealth. If you think about these other asteroids,,there's a class of the nickel iron,,which in platinum-group metal markets alone,are worth something like 20 trillion dollars,,if you can go out and grab one of these rocks.,My plan is to actually buy puts on the precious metal market,,and then actually claim that I'm going to go out and get one.,And that will fund the actual mission to go and get one.,But fear, curiosity and greed have driven us.,And for me, this is -- I'm the short kid on the right.,This was -- my motivation was actually during Apollo. 
 And Apollo was one of the greatest motivators ever.,If you think about what happened at the turn of -- early 1960s,,on May 25, JFK said, "We're going to go to the moon.",And people left their jobs and they went to obscure locations,to go and be part of this amazing mission.,And we knew nothing about going to space.,We went from having literally put Alan Shepard in suborbital flight,to going to the moon in eight years,,and the average age of the people that got us there was 26 years old.,They didn't know what couldn't be done.,They had to make up everything.,And that, my friend, is amazing motivation.,This is Gene Cernan, a good friend of mine, saying,,"If I can go to the moon" -- this is the last human on the moon so far --,"nothing, nothing is impossible." But of course,,we've thought about the government always as the person taking us there. 
 But I put forward here, the government is not going to get us there.,The government is unable to take the risks required to open up this precious frontier.,The shuttle is costing a billion dollars a launch.,That's a pathetic number. It's unreasonable.,We shouldn't be happy in standing for that.,One of the things that we did with the Ansari X PRIZE,was take the challenge on that risk is OK, you know.,As we are going out there and taking on a new frontier,,we should be allowed to risk.,In fact, anyone who says we shouldn't, you know,,just needs to be put aside, because, as we go forward,,in fact, the greatest discoveries we will ever know is ahead of us.,The entrepreneurs in the space business are the furry mammals,,and clearly the industrial-military complex --,with Boeing and Lockheed and NASA -- are the dinosaurs.,The ability for us to access these resources,to gain planetary redundancy --,we can now gather all the information, the genetic codes,,you know, everything stored on our databases,,and back them up off the planet,,in case there would be one of those disastrous situations. 
 The difficulty is getting there, and clearly, the cost to orbit is key.,Once you're in orbit, you are two thirds of the way, energetically, to anywhere --,the moon, to Mars. And today,,there's only three vehicles -- the U.S. shuttle, the Russian Soyuz,and the Chinese vehicle -- that gets you there.,Arguably, it's about 100 million dollars a person on the space shuttle.,One of the companies I started, Space Adventures, will sell you a ticket.,We've done two so far. We'll be announcing two more on the Soyuz,to go up to the space station for 20 million dollars.,But that's expensive and to understand what the potential is -- 
 (Laughter) -- 
 it is expensive. But people are willing to pay that!,You know, one -- we have a very unique period in time today.,For the first time ever, we have enough wealth,concentrated in the hands of few individuals,and the technology accessible,that will allow us to really drive space exploration.,But how cheap could it get? I want to give you the end point.,We know -- 20 million dollars today, you can go and buy a ticket,,but how cheap could it get? 
 Let's go back to high school physics here.,If you calculate the amount of potential energy, mgh,,to take you and your spacesuit up to a couple hundred miles,,and then you accelerate yourself to 17,500 miles per hour --,remember, that one half MV squared -- and you figure it out.,It's about 5.7 gigajoules of energy.,If you expended that over an hour, it's about 1.6 megawatts.,If you go to one of Vijay's micro-power sources,,and they sell it to you for seven cents a kilowatt hour --,anybody here fast in math?,How much will it cost you and your spacesuit to go to orbit?,100 bucks. That's the price-improvement curve that --,we need some breakthroughs in physics along the way,,I'll grant you that. 
 (Laughter) 
 But guys, if history has taught us anything,,it's that if you can imagine it, you will get there eventually.,I have no question that the physics,,the engineering to get us down to the point,where all of us can afford orbital space flight is around the corner.,The difficulty is that there needs to be a real marketplace to drive the investment.,Today, the Boeings and the Lockheeds don't spend a dollar,of their own money in R&D.,It's all government research dollars, and very few of those.,And in fact, the large corporations,,the governments, can't take the risk.,So we need what I call an exothermic economic reaction in space.,Today's commercial markets worldwide, global commercial launch market?,12 to 15 launches per year.,Number of commercial companies out there? 12 to 15 companies.,One per company. That's not it. There's only one marketplace,,and I call them self-loading carbon payloads.,They come with their own money. They're easy to make.,It's people. The Ansari X PRIZE was my solution,,reading about Lindbergh for creating the vehicles to get us there. 
 We offered 10 million dollars in cash for the first reusable ship,,carry three people up to 100 kilometers,,come back down, and within two weeks, make the trip again.,Twenty-six teams from seven countries entered the competition,,spending between one to 25 million dollars each.,And of course, we had beautiful SpaceShipOne,,which made those two flights and won the competition.,And I'd like to take you there, to that morning,,for just a quick video. 
 (Video) Pilot: Release our fire. 
 Richard Searfoss: Good luck. 
 (Applause) 
 RS: We've got an altitude call of 368,000 feet. 
 (Applause) 
 RS: So in my official capacity as the chief judge,of the Ansari X PRIZE competition,,I declare that Mojave Aerospace Ventures,has indeed earned the Ansari X PRIZE. 
 (Applause) 
 Peter Diamandis: Probably the most difficult thing that I had to do,was raise the capital for this. It was literally impossible.,We went -- I went to 100, 200 CEOs, CMOs.,No one believed it was done. Everyone said, "Oh, what does NASA think?,Well, people are going to die,,how can you possibly going to put this forward?",I found a visionary family, the Ansari family, and Champ Car,,and raised part of the money, but not the full 10 million. 
 And what I ended up doing was going out to the insurance industry,and buying a hole-in-one insurance policy.,See, the insurance companies went to Boeing and Lockheed,,and said, "Are you going to compete?" No.,"Are you going to compete?" No. "No one's going to win this thing.",So, they took a bet that no one would win by January of '05,,and I took a bet that someone would win. 
 (Applause) 
 So -- and the best thing is they paid off and the check didn't bounce. 
 (Laughter) 
 We've had a lot of accomplishments,and it's been a tremendous success.,One of the things I'm most happy about is that the SpaceShipOne,is going to hang in Air and Space Museum,,next to the Spirit of St. Louis and the Wright Flyer.,Isn't that great? (Applause),So a little bit about the future, steps to space, what's available for you.,Today, you can go and experience weightless flights.,By '08, suborbital flights, the price tag for that, you know, on Virgin,,is going to be about 200,000.,There are three or four other serious efforts that will bring the price down very rapidly,,I think, to about 25,000 dollars for a suborbital flight.,Orbital flights -- we can take you to the space station. 
 And then I truly believe, once a group is in orbit around the Earth --,I know if they don't do it, I am --,we're going to stockpile some fuel,,make a beeline for the moon and grab some real estate. 
 (Laughter) 
 Quick moment for the designers in the audience.,We spent 11 years getting FAA approval to do zero gravity flights.,Here are some fun images. Here's Burt Rutan,and my good friend Greg Meronek inside a zero gravity --,people think a zero gravity room,,there's a switch on there that turns it off --,but it's actually parabolic flight of an airplane.,And turns out 7-Up has just done a little commercial that's airing this month.,If we can get the audio up? 
 (Video) Narrator: For a chance to win the first free ticket to space,,look for specially marked packages of Diet 7-Up.,When you want the taste that won't weigh you down,,the only way to go is up. 
 PD: That was filmed inside our airplane, and so, you can now do this.,We're based down in Florida.,Let me talk about the other thing I'm excited about.,The future of prizes. You know, prizes are a very old idea.,I had the pleasure of borrowing from the Longitude Prize,and the Orteig Prize that put Lindbergh forward.,And we have made a decision in the X PRIZE Foundation,to actually carry that concept forward into other technology areas,,and we just took on a new mission statement:,"to bring about radical breakthroughs in space,and other technologies for the benefit of humanity.",And this is something that we're very excited about.,I showed this slide to Larry Page, who just joined our board. 
 And you know, when you give to a nonprofit,,you might have 50 cents on the dollar.,If you have a matching grant, it's typically two or three to one.,If you put up a prize, you can get literally a 50 to one leverage on your dollars.,And that's huge. And then he turned around and said,,"Well, if you back a prize institute that runs a 10 prize, you get 500 to one.",I said, "Well, that's great.",So, we have actually -- are looking to turn the X PRIZE,into a world-class prize institute.,This is what happens when you put up a prize,,when you announce it and teams start to begin doing trials.,You get publicity increase, and when it's won,,publicity shoots through the roof -- if it's properly managed --,and that's part of the benefits to a sponsor.,Then, when the prize is actually won, after it's moving,,you get societal benefits, you know, new technology, new capability.,And the benefit to the sponsors,is the sum of the publicity and societal benefits over the long term.,That's our value proposition in a prize. 
 If you were going to go and try to create SpaceShipOne,,or any kind of a new technology,,you have to fund that from the beginning,and maintain that funding with an uncertain outcome.,It may or may not happen. But if you put up a prize,,the beautiful thing is, you know, it's a very small maintenance fee,,and you pay on success.,Orteig didn't pay a dime out to the nine teams that went across --,tried to go across the Atlantic,,and we didn't pay a dime until someone won the Ansari X PRIZE.,So, prizes work great.,You know, innovators, the entrepreneurs out there,,you know that when you're going for a goal,,the first thing you have to do is believe,that you can do it yourself.,Then, you've got to, you know, face potential public ridicule,of -- that's a crazy idea, it'll never work.,And then you have to convince others,,so that they can, in fact, help you raise the funds,,and then you've got to deal with the fact that you've got government bureaucracies,and institutions that don't want you to move those things forward,,and you have to deal with failures. What a prize does,,what we've experienced a prize doing,,is literally help to short-circuit or support all of these things,,because a prize credentials the idea that this is a good idea.,Well, it must be a good idea.,Someone's offering 10 million dollars to go and do this thing. 
 And each of these areas was something that we found,the Ansari X PRIZE helped short-circuit these for innovation.,So, as an organization, we put together a prize discovery process,of how to come up with prizes and write the rules,,and we're actually looking at creating prizes,in a number of different categories.,We're looking at attacking energy, environment, nanotechnology --,and I'll talk about those more in a moment.,And the way we're doing that is we're creating prize teams,within the X PRIZE. We have a space prize team.,We're going after an orbital prize. 
 We are looking at a number of energy prizes.,Craig Venter has just joined our board,and we're doing a rapid genome sequencing prize with him,,we'll be announcing later this fall,,about -- imagine being able to sequence anybody's DNA,for under 1,000 dollars, revolutionize medicine.,And clean water, education, medicine and even looking at social entrepreneurship.,So my final slide here is, the most critical tool,for solving humanity's grand challenges -- it isn't technology,,it isn't money, it's only one thing --,it's the committed, passionate human mind. 
 (Applause)My title: "Queerer than we cannsuppose: the strangeness of science.","Queerer than we can suppose" comesnfrom J.B.S. Haldane, the famous biologist,,who said, "Now, my own suspicionnis that the universe is not only queerer,than we suppose, but queerernthan we can suppose.,I suspect that there are more thingsnin heaven and earth,than are dreamed of, or cannbe dreamed of, in any philosophy.",Richard Feynman comparednthe accuracy of quantum theories --,experimental predictions --,to specifying the width of North Americanto within one hair's breadth of accuracy.,This means that quantum theorynhas got to be, in some sense, true.,Yet the assumptionsnthat quantum theory needs to make,in order to deliver thosenpredictions are so mysterious,that even Feynman himselfnwas moved to remark,,"If you think you understandnquantum theory,,you don't understand quantum theory." 
 It's so queer that physicistsnresort to one or another,paradoxical interpretation of it.,David Deutsch, who's talking here,nin "The Fabric of Reality,",embraces the many-worldsninterpretation of quantum theory,,because the worst that youncan say about it,is that it's preposterously wasteful.,It postulates a vast and rapidly growingnnumber of universes existing in parallel,,mutually undetectable,,except through the narrow portholenof quantum mechanical experiments.,And that's Richard Feynman. 
 The biologist Lewis Wolpert believes,that the queerness of modern physics,is just an extreme example.,Science, as opposed to technology,,does violence to common sense.,Every time you drink a glassnof water, he points out,,the odds are that you will imbibenat least one molecule,that passed through the bladdernof Oliver Cromwell.,(Laughter),It's just elementary probability theory. 
 (Laughter) 
 The number of moleculesnper glassful is hugely greater,than the number of glassfuls,nor bladdersful, in the world.,And of course, there's nothing specialnabout Cromwell or bladders --,you have just breathed in a nitrogen atom,that passed through the right lungnof the third iguanodon,to the left of the tall cycad tree. 
 "Queerer than we can suppose.",What is it that makes usncapable of supposing anything,,and does this tell us anythingnabout what we can suppose?,Are there things about the universenthat will be forever beyond our grasp,,but not beyond the graspnof some superior intelligence?,Are there things about the universe,that are, in principle,nungraspable by any mind,,however superior?,The history of science has beennone long series of violent brainstorms,,as successive generationsnhave come to terms with,increasing levels of queernessnin the universe.,We're now so used to the ideanthat the Earth spins,,rather than the Sun moves across the sky,,it's hard for us to realize,what a shattering mental revolutionnthat must have been.,After all, it seems obviousnthat the Earth is large and motionless,,the Sun, small and mobile.,But it's worth recallingnWittgenstein's remark on the subject:,"Tell me," he asked a friend,n"why do people always say,it was natural for man to assumenthat the Sun went 'round the Earth,,rather than that the Earth was rotating?",And his friend replied, "Well, obviously,,because it just looks as thoughnthe Sun is going round the Earth.",Wittgenstein replied, "Well,nwhat would it have looked like,if it had looked as thoughnthe Earth was rotating?" 
 (Laughter) 
 Science has taught us,nagainst all intuition,,that apparently solid things,nlike crystals and rocks,,are really almost entirelyncomposed of empty space.,And the familiar illustrationnis the nucleus of an atom,is a fly in the middlenof a sports stadium,,and the next atomnis in the next sports stadium.,So it would seem the hardest,nsolidest, densest rock,is really almost entirely empty space,,broken only by tiny particlesnso widely spaced they shouldn't count.,Why, then, do rocks look and feelnsolid and hard and impenetrable?,As an evolutionary biologist,nI'd say this: our brains have evolved,to help us survive within the ordersnof magnitude, of size and speed,which our bodies operate at.,We never evolved to navigatenin the world of atoms.,If we had, our brainsnprobably would perceive rocks,as full of empty space.,Rocks feel hard and impenetrable,to our hands, precisely becausenobjects like rocks and hands,cannot penetrate each other.,It's therefore useful,for our brains to construct notionsnlike "solidity" and "impenetrability,",because such notions help usnto navigate our bodies,through the middle-sized worldnin which we have to navigate. 
 Moving to the other end of the scale,,our ancestors never had to navigatenthrough the cosmos,at speeds close to the speed of light.,If they had, our brains would benmuch better at understanding Einstein.,I want to give the name "Middle World"nto the medium-scaled environment,in which we've evolvednthe ability to take act --,nothing to do with "Middle Earth" --,Middle World. 
 (Laughter) 
 We are evolved denizens of Middle World,,and that limits whatnwe are capable of imagining.,We find it intuitively easynto grasp ideas like,,when a rabbit movesnat the sort of medium velocity,at which rabbits and othernMiddle World objects move,,and hits another Middle World objectnlike a rock, it knocks itself out. 
 May I introduce Major GeneralnAlbert Stubblebine III,,commander of militarynintelligence in 1983. 
 "...[He] stared at his wall in Arlington,nVirginia, and decided to do it.,As frightening as the prospect was,nhe was going into the next office.,He stood up and movednout from behind his desk.,'What is the atom mostly made of?'nhe thought, 'Space.',He started walking. 'What am Inmostly made of? Atoms.',He quickened his pace,nalmost to a jog now.,'What is the wall mostly made of?' 
 (Laughter) 
 'Atoms!',All I have to do is merge the spaces.,Then, General Stubblebine bangednhis nose hard on the wall of his office.,Stubblebine, who commandedn16,000 soldiers,,was confounded by his continual failurento walk through the wall.,He has no doubt that this abilitynwill one day be a common tool,in the military arsenal.,Who would screw around with an armynthat could do that?" 
 That's from an article in Playboy,,which I was reading the other day. 
 (Laughter) 
 I have every reason to think it's true;,I was reading Playboy because I, myself,nhad an article in it. 
 (Laughter) 
 Unaided human intuition,nschooled in Middle World,,finds it hard to believe Galileonwhen he tells us,a heavy object and a light object,nair friction aside,,would hit the ground at the same instant.,And that's because in Middle World,nair friction is always there.,If we'd evolved in a vacuum,,we would expect them to hitnthe ground simultaneously.,If we were bacteria,,constantly buffeted by thermalnmovements of molecules,,it would be different.,But we Middle-Worlders are too bignto notice Brownian motion.,In the same way, our livesnare dominated by gravity,,but are almost obliviousnto the force of surface tension.,A small insect would reversenthese priorities. 
 Steve Grand -- he's the one on the left,,Douglas Adams is on the right.,Steve Grand, in his book,n"Creation: Life and How to Make It,",is positively scathing about ournpreoccupation with matter itself.,We have this tendency to thinknthat only solid, material things,are really things at all.,Waves of electromagnetic fluctuationnin a vacuum seem unreal.,Victorians thought the wavesnhad to be waves in some material medium:,the ether.,But we find real matter comforting,only because we've evolvednto survive in Middle World,,where matter is a useful fiction.,A whirlpool, for Steve Grand,nis a thing with just as much reality,as a rock. 
 In a desert plain in Tanzania,,in the shadow of the volcanonOl Doinyo Lengai,,there's a dune made of volcanic ash.,The beautiful thingnis that it moves bodily.,It's what's technically knownnas a "barchan,",and the entire dune walksnacross the desert in a westerly direction,at a speed of about 17 meters per year.,It retains its crescent shape and movesnin the direction of the horns.,What happens is that the wind blowsnthe sand up the shallow slope,on the other side,,and then, as each sand grain hitsnthe top of the ridge, it cascades down,on the inside of the crescent,,and so the whole horn-shaped dune moves.,Steve Grand points outnthat you and I are, ourselves,,more like a wave than a permanent thing.,He invites us, the reader,,to think of an experiencenfrom your childhood,,something you remember clearly,,something you can see,nfeel, maybe even smell,,as if you were really there.,After all, you really were therenat the time, weren't you?,How else would you remember it?,But here is the bombshell:nYou weren't there.,Not a single atomnthat is in your body today,was there when that event took place.,Matter flows from place to place,and momentarily comes together to be you.,Whatever you are, therefore,,you are not the stuffnof which you are made.,If that doesn't make the hair stand upnon the back of your neck,,read it again until it does,nbecause it is important. 
 So "really" isn't a word that we shouldnuse with simple confidence.,If a neutrino had a brain,,which it evolvednin neutrino-sized ancestors,,it would say that rocks reallyndo consist of empty space.,We have brains that evolvednin medium-sized ancestors,which couldn't walk through rocks.,"Really," for an animal, is whatevernits brain needs it to be,in order to assist its survival.,And because different speciesnlive in different worlds,,there will be a discomfortingnvariety of "reallys.",What we see of the real worldnis not the unvarnished world,,but a model of the world,nregulated and adjusted by sense data,,but constructed so it's usefulnfor dealing with the real world. 
 The nature of the model dependsnon the kind of animal we are.,A flying animal needsna different kind of model,from a walking, climbingnor swimming animal.,A monkey's brain must havensoftware capable of simulating,a three-dimensional worldnof branches and trunks.,A mole's software for constructing modelsnof its world will be customized,for underground use.,A water strider's brainndoesn't need 3D software at all,,since it lives on the surface of the pond,,in an Edwin Abbott flatland. 
 I've speculated that bats may seencolor with their ears.,The world model that a bat needsnin order to navigate,through three dimensions catching insects,must be pretty similar to the worldnmodel that any flying bird --,a day-flying bird like a swallow --nneeds to perform the same kind of tasks.,The fact that the bat usesnechoes in pitch darkness,to input the currentnvariables to its model,,while the swallow usesnlight, is incidental.,Bats, I've even suggested, usenperceived hues, such as red and blue,,as labels, internal labels,nfor some useful aspect of echoes --,perhaps the acoustic texture of surfaces,nfurry or smooth and so on --,in the same way as swallows or indeed,nwe, use those perceived hues --,redness and blueness, etc. --,to label long and shortnwavelengths of light.,There's nothing inherent about rednthat makes it long wavelength. 
 The point is that the nature of the modelnis governed by how it is to be used,,rather than by the sensorynmodality involved.,J.B.S. Haldane himself hadnsomething to say about animals,whose world is dominated by smell.,Dogs can distinguish two very similarnfatty acids, extremely diluted:,caprylic acid and caproic acid.,The only difference, you see,,is that one has an extra pairnof carbon atoms in the chain.,Haldane guesses that a dog would probablynbe able to place the acids,in the order of their molecularnweights by their smells,,just as a man could placena number of piano wires,in the order of their lengthsnby means of their notes.,Now, there's anothernfatty acid, capric acid,,which is just like the other two,,except that it has two more carbon atoms.,A dog that had never metncapric acid would, perhaps,,have no more trouble imagining its smell,than we would have troublenimagining a trumpet, say,,playing one note higher than we've heardna trumpet play before.,Perhaps dogs and rhinos and othernsmell-oriented animals smell in color.,And the argument would be exactlynthe same as for the bats. 
 Middle World -- the rangenof sizes and speeds,which we have evolved to feelnintuitively comfortable with --,is a bit like the narrow rangenof the electromagnetic spectrum,that we see as light of various colors.,We're blind to allnfrequencies outside that,,unless we use instruments to help us.,Middle World is the narrownrange of reality,which we judge to be normal,nas opposed to the queerness,of the very small, the very largenand the very fast.,We could make a similarnscale of improbabilities;,nothing is totally impossible.,Miracles are just eventsnthat are extremely improbable.,A marble statue could wave its hand at us;,the atoms that make upnits crystalline structure,are all vibrating back and forth anyway.,Because there are so many of them,,and because there's nonagreement among them,in their preferred direction of movement,,the marble, as we see itnin Middle World, stays rock steady.,But the atoms in the handncould all just happen to move,the same way at the same time,nand again and again.,In this case, the hand would move,,and we'd see it waving at usnin Middle World.,The odds against it,nof course, are so great,that if you set out writing zerosnat the time of the origin of the universe,,you still would not have writtennenough zeros to this day. 
 Evolution in Middle Worldnhas not equipped us,to handle very improbable events;nwe don't live long enough.,In the vastness of astronomical spacenand geological time,,that which seems impossiblenin Middle World,might turn out to be inevitable.,One way to think about thatnis by counting planets.,We don't know how many planetsnthere are in the universe,,but a good estimate is about 10 to the 20,nor 100 billion billion.,And that gives us a nice way to expressnour estimate of life's improbability.,We could make some sort of landmark pointsnalong a spectrum of improbability,,which might look like the electromagneticnspectrum we just looked at. 
 If life has arisen only once on any --,life could originate once per planet,ncould be extremely common,or it could originate once per star,or once per galaxy or maybe onlynonce in the entire universe,,in which case it would have to be here.,And somewhere up there would be the chance,that a frog would turn into a prince,,and similar magical things like that.,If life has arisen on only one planetnin the entire universe,,that planet has to be our planet,nbecause here we are talking about it.,And that means that if we wantnto avail ourselves of it,,we're allowed to postulate chemical eventsnin the origin of life,which have a probability as lownas one in 100 billion billion.,I don't think we shall havento avail ourselves of that,,because I suspect that lifenis quite common in the universe.,And when I say quite common,nit could still be so rare,that no one island of lifenever encounters another,,which is a sad thought. 
 How shall we interpretn"queerer than we can suppose?",Queerer than can in principle be supposed,,or just queerer than we can suppose,ngiven the limitations,of our brain's evolutionarynapprenticeship in Middle World?,Could we, by training and practice,,emancipate ourselves from Middle World,and achieve some sort of intuitivenas well as mathematical understanding,of the very small and the very large?,I genuinely don't know the answer.,I wonder whether we might help ourselvesnto understand, say, quantum theory,,if we brought up childrennto play computer games,beginning in early childhood,,which had a make-believe world of ballsngoing through two slits on a screen,,a world in which the strange goings-onnof quantum mechanics were enlarged,by the computer's make-believe,,so that they became familiarnon the Middle-World scale of the stream.,And similarly, a relativisticncomputer game,,in which objects on the screen manifestnthe Lorentz contraction, and so on,,to try to get ourselves -- to get childrenninto the way of thinking about it. 
 I want to end by applyingnthe idea of Middle World,to our perceptions of each other.,Most scientists today subscribento a mechanistic view of the mind:,we're the way we are because our brainsnare wired up as they are,,our hormones are the way they are.,We'd be different, our charactersnwould be different,,if our neuro-anatomy and ournphysiological chemistry were different.,But we scientists are inconsistent.,If we were consistent,,our response to a misbehavingnperson, like a child-murderer,,should be something like:,this unit has a faulty component;nit needs repairing.,That's not what we say.,What we say -- and I includenthe most austerely mechanistic among us,,which is probably me --,what we say is, "Vile monster,nprison is too good for you.",Or worse, we seek revenge,nin all probability thereby triggering,the next phase in an escalatingncycle of counter-revenge,,which we see, of course,nall over the world today.,In short, when we'renthinking like academics,,we regard people as elaboratenand complicated machines,,like computers or cars.,But when we revert to being human,,we behave more like Basil Fawlty,nwho, we remember,,thrashed his car to teach it a lesson,,when it wouldn't start on "Gourmet Night." 
 (Laughter) 
 The reason we personify thingsnlike cars and computers,is that just as monkeys livenin an arboreal world,and moles live in an underground world,and water striders live in a surfacentension-dominated flatland,,we live in a social world.,We swim through a sea of people --,a social version of Middle World.,We are evolved to second-guessnthe behavior of others,by becoming brilliant,nintuitive psychologists.,Treating people as machines,may be scientificallynand philosophically accurate,,but it's a cumbersome waste of time,if you want to guess what this personnis going to do next.,The economically useful waynto model a person,is to treat him as a purposeful,ngoal-seeking agent,with pleasures and pains,ndesires and intentions,,guilt, blame-worthiness.,Personification and the imputingnof intentional purpose,is such a brilliantly successfulnway to model humans,,it's hardly surprisingnthe same modeling software,often seizes control when we'rentrying to think about entities,for which it's not appropriate,nlike Basil Fawlty with his car,or like millions of deluded people,nwith the universe as a whole. 
 (Laughter) 
 If the universe is queerernthan we can suppose,,is it just becausenwe've been naturally selected,to suppose only what we needed to suppose,in order to survivenin the Pleistocene of Africa?,Or are our brains so versatilenand expandable that we can train ourselves,to break out of the box of our evolution?,Or finally, are there some thingsnin the universe so queer,that no philosophy of beings,nhowever godlike, could dream them? 
 Thank you very much. 
 (Applause)This is a picture of Maurice Druon,,the Honorary Perpetual Secretary of L'Academie francaise,,the French Academy.,He is splendidly attired in his 68,000-dollar uniform,,befitting the role of the French Academy,as legislating the,correct usage in French,and perpetuating the language.,The French Academy has two main tasks:,it compiles a dictionary of official French.,They're now working on their ninth edition,,which they began in 1930, and they've reached the letter P.,They also legislate on correct usage,,such as the proper term for what the French call "email,",which ought to be "courriel.",The World Wide Web, the French are told,,ought to be referred to as,"la toile d'araignee mondiale" -- the Global Spider Web --,recommendations that the French gaily ignore. 
 Now, this is one model of how language comes to be:,namely, it's legislated by an academy.,But anyone who looks at language realizes,that this is a rather silly conceit,,that language, rather, emerges from human minds interacting from one another.,And this is visible in the unstoppable change in language --,the fact that by the time the Academy finishes their dictionary,,it will already be well out of date. 
 We see it in the,constant appearance of slang and jargon,,of the historical change in languages,,in divergence of dialects,and the formation of new languages.,So language is not so much a creator or shaper of human nature,,so much as a window onto human nature.,In a book that I'm currently working on,,I hope to use language to shed light on,a number of aspects of human nature,,including the cognitive machinery,with which humans conceptualize the world,and the relationship types that govern human interaction.,And I'm going to say a few words about each one this morning. 
 Let me start off with a technical problem in language,that I've worried about for quite some time --,and indulge me,in my passion for verbs and how they're used.,The problem is, which verbs go in which constructions?,The verb is the chassis of the sentence.,It's the framework onto which the other parts are bolted. 
 Let me give you a quick reminder,of something that you've long forgotten.,An intransitive verb, such as "dine," for example,,can't take a direct object.,You have to say, "Sam dined," not, "Sam dined the pizza.",A transitive verb mandates,that there has to be an object there:,"Sam devoured the pizza." You can't just say, "Sam devoured.",There are dozens or scores of verbs of this type,,each of which shapes its sentence.,So, a problem in explaining how children learn language,,a problem in teaching language to adults so that they don't make grammatical errors,,and a problem in programming computers to use language is,which verbs go in which constructions. 
 For example, the dative construction in English.,You can say, "Give a muffin to a mouse," the prepositional dative.,Or, "Give a mouse a muffin," the double-object dative.,"Promise anything to her," "Promise her anything," and so on.,Hundreds of verbs can go both ways.,So a tempting generalization for a child,,for an adult, for a computer,is that any verb that can appear in the construction,,"subject-verb-thing-to-a-recipient",can also be expressed as "subject-verb-recipient-thing.",A handy thing to have,,because language is infinite,,and you can't just parrot back the sentences that you've heard.,You've got to extract generalizations,so you can produce and understand new sentences.,This would be an example of how to do that. 
 Unfortunately, there appear to be idiosyncratic exceptions.,You can say, "Biff drove the car to Chicago,",but not, "Biff drove Chicago the car.",You can say, "Sal gave Jason a headache,",but it's a bit odd to say, "Sal gave a headache to Jason.",The solution is that these constructions, despite initial appearance,,are not synonymous,,that when you crank up the microscope,on human cognition, you see that there's a subtle difference,in meaning between them.,So, "give the X to the Y,",that construction corresponds to the thought,"cause X to go to Y." Whereas "give the Y the X",corresponds to the thought "cause Y to have X." 
 Now, many events can be subject to either construal,,kind of like the classic figure-ground reversal illusions,,in which you can either pay attention,to the particular object,,in which case the space around it recedes from attention,,or you can see the faces in the empty space,,in which case the object recedes out of consciousness.,How are these construals reflected in language?,Well, in both cases, the thing that is construed as being affected,is expressed as the direct object,,the noun after the verb.,So, when you think of the event as causing the muffin to go somewhere --,where you're doing something to the muffin --,you say, "Give the muffin to the mouse.",When you construe it as "cause the mouse to have something,",you're doing something to the mouse,,and therefore you express it as, "Give the mouse the muffin." 
 So which verbs go in which construction --,the problem with which I began --,depends on whether the verb specifies a kind of motion,or a kind of possession change.,To give something involves both causing something to go,and causing someone to have.,To drive the car only causes something to go,,because Chicago's not the kind of thing that can possess something.,Only humans can possess things.,And to give someone a headache causes them to have the headache,,but it's not as if you're taking the headache out of your head,and causing it to go to the other person,,and implanting it in them.,You may just be loud or obnoxious,,or some other way causing them to have the headache.,So, that's,an example of the kind of thing that I do in my day job. 
 So why should anyone care?,Well, there are a number of interesting conclusions, I think,,from this and many similar kinds of analyses,of hundreds of English verbs.,First, there's a level of fine-grained conceptual structure,,which we automatically and unconsciously compute,every time we produce or utter a sentence, that governs our use of language.,You can think of this as the language of thought, or "mentalese." 
 It seems to be based on a fixed set of concepts,,which govern dozens of constructions and thousands of verbs --,not only in English, but in all other languages --,fundamental concepts such as space,,time, causation and human intention,,such as, what is the means and what is the ends?,These are reminiscent of the kinds of categories,that Immanuel Kant argued,are the basic framework for human thought,,and it's interesting that our unconscious use of language,seems to reflect these Kantian categories.,Doesn't care about perceptual qualities,,such as color, texture, weight and speed,,which virtually never differentiate,the use of verbs in different constructions. 
 An additional twist is that all of the constructions in English,are used not only literally,,but in a quasi-metaphorical way.,For example, this construction, the dative,,is used not only to transfer things,,but also for the metaphorical transfer of ideas,,as when we say, "She told a story to me",or "told me a story,","Max taught Spanish to the students" or "taught the students Spanish.",It's exactly the same construction,,but no muffins, no mice, nothing moving at all.,It evokes the container metaphor of communication,,in which we conceive of ideas as objects,,sentences as containers,,and communication as a kind of sending.,As when we say we "gather" our ideas, to "put" them "into" words,,and if our words aren't "empty" or "hollow,",we might get these ideas "across" to a listener,,who can "unpack" our words to "extract" their "content." 
 And indeed, this kind of verbiage is not the exception, but the rule.,It's very hard to find any example of abstract language,that is not based on some concrete metaphor.,For example, you can use the verb "go",and the prepositions "to" and "from",in a literal, spatial sense.,"The messenger went from Paris to Istanbul.",You can also say, "Biff went from sick to well.",He needn't go anywhere. He could have been in bed the whole time,,but it's as if his health is a point in state space,that you conceptualize as moving.,Or, "The meeting went from three to four,",in which we conceive of time as stretched along a line.,Likewise, we use "force" to indicate,not only physical force,,as in, "Rose forced the door to open,",but also interpersonal force,,as in, "Rose forced Sadie to go," not necessarily by manhandling her,,but by issuing a threat.,Or, "Rose forced herself to go,",as if there were two entities inside Rose's head,,engaged in a tug of a war. 
 Second conclusion is that the ability to conceive,of a given event in two different ways,,such as "cause something to go to someone",and "causing someone to have something,",I think is a fundamental feature of human thought,,and it's the basis for much human argumentation,,in which people don't differ so much on the facts,as on how they ought to be construed.,Just to give you a few examples:,"ending a pregnancy" versus "killing a fetus;","a ball of cells" versus "an unborn child;","invading Iraq" versus "liberating Iraq;","redistributing wealth" versus "confiscating earnings.",And I think the biggest picture of all,would take seriously the fact,that so much of our verbiage about abstract events,is based on a concrete metaphor,and see human intelligence itself,as consisting of a repertoire of concepts --,such as objects, space, time, causation and intention --,which are useful in a social, knowledge-intensive species,,whose evolution you can well imagine,,and a process of metaphorical abstraction,that allows us to bleach these concepts,of their original conceptual content --,space, time and force --,and apply them to new abstract domains,,therefore allowing a species that evolved,to deal with rocks and tools and animals,,to conceptualize mathematics, physics, law,and other abstract domains. 
 Well, I said I'd talk about two windows on human nature --,the cognitive machinery with which we conceptualize the world,,and now I'm going to say a few words about the relationship types,that govern human social interaction,,again, as reflected in language.,And I'll start out with a puzzle, the puzzle of indirect speech acts.,Now, I'm sure most of you have seen the movie "Fargo.",And you might remember the scene in which,the kidnapper is pulled over by a police officer,,is asked to show his driver's license,and holds his wallet out,with a 50-dollar bill extending,at a slight angle out of the wallet.,And he says, "I was just thinking,that maybe we could take care of it here in Fargo,",which everyone, including the audience,,interprets as a veiled bribe.,This kind of indirect speech is rampant in language.,For example, in polite requests,,if someone says, "If you could pass the guacamole,,that would be awesome,",we know exactly what he means,,even though that's a rather bizarre,concept being expressed. 
 (Laughter) 
 "Would you like to come up and see my etchings?",I think most people,understand the intent behind that.,And likewise, if someone says,,"Nice store you've got there. It would be a real shame if something happened to it" --,(Laughter) --,we understand that as a veiled threat,,rather than a musing of hypothetical possibilities.,So the puzzle is, why are bribes,,polite requests, solicitations and threats so often veiled?,No one's fooled.,Both parties know exactly what the speaker means,,and the speaker knows the listener knows,that the speaker knows that the listener knows, etc., etc.,So what's going on? 
 I think the key idea is that language,is a way of negotiating relationships,,and human relationships fall into a number of types.,There's an influential taxonomy by the anthropologist Alan Fiske,,in which relationships can be categorized, more or less,,into communality, which works on the principle,"what's mine is thine, what's thine is mine,",the kind of mindset that operates within a family, for example;,dominance, whose principle is "don't mess with me;",reciprocity, "you scratch my back, I'll scratch yours;",and sexuality, in the immortal words of Cole Porter, "Let's do it." 
 Now, relationship types can be negotiated.,Even though there are default situations,in which one of these mindsets can be applied,,they can be stretched and extended.,For example, communality applies most naturally,within family or friends,,but it can be used to try to transfer,the mentality of sharing,to groups that ordinarily would not be disposed to exercise it.,For example, in brotherhoods, fraternal organizations,,sororities, locutions like "the family of man,",you try to get people who are not related,to use the relationship type that would ordinarily,be appropriate to close kin. 
 Now, mismatches -- when one person assumes one relationship type,,and another assumes a different one -- can be awkward.,If you went over and you helped yourself,to a shrimp off your boss' plate,,for example, that would be an awkward situation.,Or if a dinner guest after the meal,pulled out his wallet and offered to pay you for the meal,,that would be rather awkward as well.,In less blatant cases,,there's still a kind of negotiation that often goes on.,In the workplace, for example,,there's often a tension over whether an employee,can socialize with the boss,,or refer to him or her,on a first-name basis.,If two friends have a,reciprocal transaction, like selling a car,,it's well known that this can be a source,of tension or awkwardness.,In dating, the transition,from friendship to sex,can lead to, notoriously, various forms of awkwardness,,and as can sex in the workplace,,in which we call the conflict between a,dominant and a sexual relationship "sexual harassment." 
 Well, what does this have to do with language?,Well, language, as a social interaction,,has to satisfy two conditions.,You have to convey the actual content --,here we get back to the container metaphor.,You want to express the bribe, the command, the promise,,the solicitation and so on,,but you also have to negotiate,and maintain the kind of relationship,you have with the other person.,The solution, I think, is that we use language at two levels:,the literal form signals,the safest relationship with the listener,,whereas the implicated content --,the reading between the lines that we count on the listener to perform --,allows the listener to derive the interpretation,which is most relevant in context,,which possibly initiates a changed relationship. 
 The simplest example of this is in the polite request.,If you express your request as a conditional --,"if you could open the window, that would be great" --,even though the content is an imperative,,the fact that you're not using the imperative voice,means that you're not acting as if you're in a relationship of dominance,,where you could presuppose the compliance of the other person.,On the other hand, you want the damn guacamole.,By expressing it as an if-then statement,,you can get the message across,without appearing to boss another person around. 
 And in a more subtle way, I think, this works,for all of the veiled speech acts,involving plausible deniability:,the bribes, threats, propositions,,solicitations and so on.,One way of thinking about it is to imagine what it would be like,if language -- where it could only be used literally.,And you can think of it in terms of a,game-theoretic payoff matrix.,Put yourself in the position of the,kidnapper wanting to bribe the officer.,There's a high stakes,in the two possibilities,of having a dishonest officer or an honest officer.,If you don't bribe the officer,,then you will get a traffic ticket --,or, as is the case of "Fargo," worse --,whether the honest officer,is honest or dishonest.,Nothing ventured, nothing gained.,In that case, the consequences are rather severe.,On the other hand, if you extend the bribe,,if the officer is dishonest,,you get a huge payoff of going free.,If the officer is honest, you get a huge penalty,of being arrested for bribery.,So this is a rather fraught situation. 
 On the other hand, with indirect language,,if you issue a veiled bribe,,then the dishonest officer,could interpret it as a bribe,,in which case you get the payoff of going free.,The honest officer can't hold you to it as being a bribe,,and therefore, you get the nuisance of the traffic ticket.,So you get the best of both worlds.,And a similar analysis, I think,,can apply to the potential awkwardness,of a sexual solicitation,,and other cases where plausible deniability is an asset.,I think this affirms,something that's long been known by diplomats --,namely, that the vagueness of language,,far from being a bug or an imperfection,,actually might be a feature of language,,one that we use to our advantage in social interactions. 
 So to sum up: language is a collective human creation,,reflecting human nature,,how we conceptualize reality,,how we relate to one another.,And then by analyzing the various quirks and complexities of language,,I think we can get a window onto what makes us tick.,Thank you very much. 
 (Applause)One of the problems of writing, and working, and looking at the Internet,is that it's very hard to separate fashion from deep change.,And so, to start helping that, I want to take us back to 1835.,In 1835, James Gordon Bennett founded the first mass-circulation newspaper,in New York City.,And it cost about 500 dollars to start it,,which was about the equivalent of 10,000 dollars of today.,By 15 years later, by 1850, doing the same thing,-- starting what was experienced as a mass--circulation daily paper,-- would come to cost two and a half million dollars.,10,000, two and a half million, 15 years.,That's the critical change that is being inverted by the Net.,And that's what I want to talk about today,,and how that relates to the emergence of social production. 
 Starting with newspapers, what we saw was high cost as an initial requirement,for making information, knowledge and culture, which led to a stark bifurcation,between producers -- who had to be able to raise financial capital,,just like any other industrial organization --,and passive consumers that could choose from a certain set of,things that this industrial model could produce.,Now, the term "information society," "information economy,",for a very long time has been used as the thing that comes after,the industrial revolution. But in fact, for purposes of understanding what's happening,today, that's wrong. Because for 150 years, we've had an information economy.,It's just been industrial,,which means those who were producing had to have a way of raising money,to pay those two and a half million dollars, and later, more for the telegraph,,and the radio transmitter, and the television, and eventually the mainframe.,And that meant they were market based, or they were government owned,,depending on what kind of system they were in. And this characterized and anchored,the way information and knowledge were produced for the next 150 years. 
 Now, let me tell you a different story. Around June 2002,,the world of supercomputers had a bombshell.,The Japanese had, for the first time, created the fastest supercomputer --,the NEC Earth Simulator -- taking the primary from the U.S.,,and about two years later -- this, by the way, is measuring the trillion floating-point,operations per second that the computer's capable of running --,sigh of relief: IBM [Blue Gene] has just edged ahead of the NEC Earth Simulator.,All of this completely ignores the fact that throughout this period,,there's another supercomputer running in the world -- SETI@home.,Four and a half million users around the world, contributing their,leftover computer cycles, whenever their computer isn't working,,by running a screen saver, and together sharing their resources to create,a massive supercomputer that NASA harnesses to analyze the data,coming from radio telescopes. 
 What this picture suggests to us is that we've got a radical change in the way,information production and exchange is capitalized. Not that it's become,less capital intensive -- that there's less money that's required,-- but that the ownership of this capital, the way the capitalization happens,,is radically distributed. Each of us, in these advanced economies,,has one of these, or something rather like it -- a computer.,They're not radically different from routers inside the middle of the network.,And computation, storage and communications capacity are in the hands of,practically every connected person -- and these are the basic physical,capital means necessary for producing information, knowledge and culture,,in the hands of something like 600 million to a billion people around the planet. 
 What this means is that for the first time since the industrial revolution,,the most important means, the most important components of the core,economic activities -- remember, we are in an information economy,-- of the most advanced economies, and there more than anywhere else,,are in the hands of the population at large. This is completely different than what we've,seen since the industrial revolution. So we've got communications and computation,capacity in the hands of the entire population,,and we've got human creativity, human wisdom, human experience,-- the other major experience, the other major input --,which unlike simple labor -- stand here turning this lever all day long --,is not something that's the same or fungible among people.,Any one of you who has taken someone else's job, or tried to give yours,to someone else, no matter how detailed the manual, you cannot transmit,what you know, what you will intuit under a certain set of circumstances.,In that we're unique, and each of us holds this critical input,into production as we hold this machine. 
 What's the effect of this? So, the story that most people know,is the story of free or open source software.,This is market share of Apache Web server,-- one of the critical applications in Web-based communications.,In 1995, two groups of people said,,"Wow, this is really important, the Web! We need a much better Web server!",One was a motley collection of volunteers who just decided,,you know, we really need this, we should write one,,and what are we going to do with what --,well, we're gonna share it! And other people will be able to develop it.,The other was Microsoft. 
 Now, if I told you that 10 years later, the motley crew of people, who didn't control,anything that they produced, acquired 20 percent of the market,and was the red line, it would be amazing! Right?,Think of it in minivans. A group of automobile,engineers on their weekends are competing with Toyota. Right?,But, in fact, of course, the story is it's the 70 percent,,including the major e-commerce site -- 70 percent of a critical application,on which Web-based communications and applications work is produced in this form, in,direct competition with Microsoft. Not in a side issue --,in a central strategic decision to try to capture a component of the Net.,Software has done this in a way that's been very visible, because,it's measurable. But the thing to see is that this actually happens throughout the Web. 
 So, NASA, at some point, did an experiment where they took images of Mars,that they were mapping, and they said, instead of having three or four,fully trained Ph.D.s doing this all the time, let's break it up into small components,,put it up on the Web, and see if people, using a very simple interface,,will actually spend five minutes here,,10 minutes there, clicking. After six months,,85,000 people used this to generate mapping at a,faster rate than the images were coming in, which was, quote,,"practically indistinguishable from the markings of a fully-trained Ph.D.,",once you showed it to a number of people and computed the average. 
 Now, if you have a little girl, and she goes and writes to,-- well, not so little, medium little -- tries to do research on Barbie.,And she'll come to Encarta, one of the main online encyclopedias.,This is what you'll find out about Barbie. This is it, there's nothing more to the definition,,including, "manufacturers" -- plural -- "now more commonly produce,ethnically diverse dolls, like this black Barbie." Which is vastly better,than what you'll find in the encyclopedia.com,,which is Barbie, Klaus. (Laughter),On the other hand, if they go to Wikipedia, they'll find a genuine article,-- and I won't talk a lot about Wikipedia, because Jimmy Wales is here --,but roughly equivalent to what you would find in the Britannica, differently written,,including the controversies over body image and commercialization,,the claims about the way in which she's a good role model, etc. 
 Another portion is not only how content is produced, but how relevance is produced.,The claim to fame of Yahoo! was, we hire people to look -- originally, not anymore,-- we hire people to look at websites and tell you --,if they're in the index, they're good. This, on the other hand, is what 60,000,passionate volunteers produce in the Open Directory Project,,each one willing to spend an hour or two on something they really care about,,to say, this is good. So, this is the Open Directory Project, with 60,000 volunteers,,each one spending a little bit of time, as opposed to a few hundred,fully paid employees. No one owns it, no one owns the output,,it's free for anyone to use and it's the output of people acting out of social,and psychological motivations to do something interesting. 
 This is not only outside of businesses. When you think of what is the critical innovation,of Google, the critical innovation is outsourcing the one most important thing --,the decision about what's relevant -- to the community of the Web as a whole,,doing whatever they want to do: so, page rank.,The critical innovation here is instead of our engineers, or our people saying,which is the most relevant, we're going to go out and count what you,,people out there on the Web, for whatever reason -- vanity, pleasure --,produced links, and tied to each other. We're going to count those, and count them up.,And again, here, you see Barbie.com, but also, very quickly,,Adiosbarbie.com, the body image for every size. A contested cultural object,,which you won't find anywhere soon on Overture, which is the classic,market-based mechanism: whoever pays the most is highest on the list. 
 So, all of that is in the creation of content, of relevance, basic human expression.,But remember, the computers were also physical. Just physical materials,-- our PCs -- we share them together. We also see this in wireless.,It used to be wireless was one person owned the license, they transmitted in an,area, and it had to be decided whether they would be licensed or based on property.,What we're seeing now is that computers and radios are becoming so sophisticated,that we're developing algorithms to let people own machines, like Wi-Fi devices,,and overlay them with a sharing protocol that would allow a community like this,to build its own wireless broadband network simply from the simple principle:,When I'm listening, when I'm not using, I can help you transfer your messages;,and when you're not using, you'll help me transfer yours.,And this is not an idealized version. These are working models that at least in some,places in the United States are being implemented, at least for public security. 
 If in 1999 I told you, let's build a data storage and retrieval system.,It's got to store terabytes. It's got to be available 24 hours a day,,seven days a week. It's got to be available from anywhere in the world.,It has to support over 100 million users at any given moment. It's got to,be robust to attack, including closing the main index, injecting malicious files,,armed seizure of some major nodes. You'd say that would take years.,It would take millions. But of course, what I'm describing is P2P file sharing.,Right? We always think of it as stealing music, but fundamentally,,it's a distributed data storage and retrieval system, where people,,for very obvious reasons, are willing to share their bandwidth and their,storage to create something. 
 So, essentially what we're seeing is the emergence of a fourth transactional,framework. It used to be that there were two primary dimensions along which,you could divide things. They could be market based, or non-market based;,they could be decentralized, or centralized.,The price system was a market-based and decentralized system.,If things worked better because you actually had somebody organizing them,,you had firms, if you wanted to be in the market -- or you had governments,or sometimes larger non-profits in the non-market.,It was too expensive to have decentralized social production,,to have decentralized action in society. That was not about society itself.,That was, in fact, economic. 
 But what we're seeing now is the emergence of this fourth system,of social sharing and exchange.,Not that it's the first time that we do nice things to each other, or for each other,,as social beings. We do it all the time.,It's that it's the first time that it's having major economic impact.,What characterizes them is decentralized authority.,You don't have to ask permission, as you do in a property-based system.,May I do this? It's open for anyone to create and innovate and share,,if they want to, by themselves or with others,,because property is one mechanism of coordination.,But it's not the only one. 
 Instead, what we see are social frameworks for all of the critical things that we use,property and contract in the market: information flows to decide what are,interesting problems; who's available and good for something;,motivation structures -- remember, money isn't always the best motivator.,If you leave a $50 check after dinner with friends,,you don't increase the probability of being invited back.,And if dinner isn't entirely obvious, think of sex. (Laughter) 
 It also requires certain new organizational approaches.,And in particular, what we've seen is task organization.,You have to hire people who know what they're doing.,You have to hire them to spend a lot of time.,Now, take the same problem,,chunk it into little modules, and motivations become trivial.,Five minutes, instead of watching TV?,Five minutes I'll spend just because it's interesting. Just because it's fun.,Just because it gives me a certain sense of meaning, or, in places that are more,involved, like Wikipedia, gives me a certain set of social relations. 
 So, a new social phenomenon is emerging.,It's creating, and it's most visible when we see it as a new form of competition.,Peer-to-peer networks assaulting the recording industry;,free and open source software taking market share from Microsoft;,Skype potentially threatening traditional telecoms;,Wikipedia competing with online encyclopedias.,But it's also a new source of opportunities for businesses.,As you see a new set of social relations and behaviors emerging,,you have new opportunities. Some of them are toolmakers.,Instead of building well-behaved appliances,-- things that you know what they'll do in advance --,you begin to build more open tools. There's a new set of values,,a new set of things people value.,You build platforms for self-expression and collaboration.,Like Wikipedia, like the Open Directory Project,,you're beginning to build platforms, and you see that as a model.,And you see surfers, people who see this happening, and in some sense,build it into a supply chain, which is a very curious one. Right? 
 You have a belief: stuff will flow out of connected human beings.,That'll give me something I can use, and I'm going to contract with someone.,I will deliver something based on what happens. It's very scary,-- that's what Google does, essentially.,That's what IBM does in software services, and they've done reasonably well. 
 So, social production is a real fact, not a fad.,It is the critical long-term shift caused by the Internet.,Social relations and exchange become significantly more important than they ever,were as an economic phenomenon. In some contexts, it's even more efficient,because of the quality of the information, the ability to find the best person,,the lower transaction costs. It's sustainable and growing fast. 
 But -- and this is the dark lining -- it is threatened by,-- in the same way that it threatens -- the incumbent industrial systems.,So next time you open the paper, and you see an intellectual property decision,,a telecoms decision, it's not about something small and technical.,It is about the future of the freedom to be as social beings with each other,,and the way information, knowledge and culture will be produced.,Because it is in this context that we see a battle over how easy or hard it will be,for the industrial information economy to simply go on as it goes,,or for the new model of production to begin to develop alongside that industrial model,,and change the way we begin to see the world and report what it is that we see.,Thank you.A public, Dewey long ago observed,,is constituted through discussion and debate.,If we are to call the tyranny of assumptions into question,,and avoid doxa, the realm of the unquestioned,,then we must be willing to subject our own assumptions,to debate and discussion.,It is in this spirit that I join into a discussion,of one of the critical issues of our time,,namely, how to mobilize different forms of capital,for the project of state building. 
 To put the assumptions very clearly:,capitalism, after 150 years, has become acceptable,,and so has democracy.,If we looked in the world of 1945,and looked at the map of capitalist economies and democratic polities,,they were the rare exception, not the norm.,The question now, however,,is both about which form of capitalism,and which type of democratic participation.,But we must acknowledge,that this moment has brought about,a rare consensus of assumptions.,And that provides the ground,for a type of action,,because consensus of each moment,allows us to act.,And it is necessary, no matter how fragile,or how provisional our consensus,,to be able to move forward. 
 But the majority of the world,neither benefits from capitalism,nor from democratic systems.,Most of the globe,experiences the state as repressive,,as an organization that is concerned,about denial of rights,,about denial of justice,,rather than provision of it.,And in terms of experience of capitalism,,there are two aspects,that the rest of the globe experiences.,First, extractive industry.,Blood diamonds, smuggled emeralds,,timber,,that is cut right from under the poorest.,Second is technical assistance.,And technical assistance might shock you,,but it's the worst form,of -- today -- of the ugly face,of the developed world to the developing countries.,Tens of billions of dollars,are supposedly spent on building capacity,with people who are paid up to 1,500 dollars a day,,who are incapable,of thinking creatively,,or organically. 
 Next assumption --,and of course the events of July 7,,I express my deep sympathy, and before that, September 11 --,have reminded us,we do not live in three different worlds.,We live in one world.,But that's easily said.,But we are not dealing with the implications,of the one world that we are living in.,And that is that if we want to have one world,,this one world cannot be based,on huge pockets of exclusion,,and then inclusion for some.,We must now finally come,to think about the premises,of a truly global world,,in relationship to the regime of rights,and responsibilities and accountabilities,that are truly global in scope.,Otherwise we will be missing,this open moment in history,,where we have a consensus,on both the form of politics,and the form of economics. 
 What is one of these organizations to pick?,We have three critical terms:,economy,,civil society,and the state.,I will not deal with those first two, except to say,that uncritical transfer of assumptions,,from one context to another,,can only make for disaster.,Economics,taught in most of the elite universities,are practically useless in my context.,My country is dominated,by drug economy and a mafia.,Textbook economics does not work in my context,,and I have very few recommendations from anybody,as to how to put together a legal economy.,The poverty of our knowledge,must become the first basis,of moving forward,,and not imposition of the framework,that works on the basis of mathematical modeling,,for which I have enormous respect.,My colleagues at Johns Hopkins were among the best. 
 Second,,instead of debating endlessly,about what is the structure of the state,,why don't we simplify,and say, what are a series of functions,that the state in the 21st century must perform?,Clare Lockhart and I are writing a book on this;,we hope to share that much widely with --,and third is that we could actually construct an index,to measure comparatively,how well these functions that we would agree on,are being performed in different places. 
 So what are these functions?,We propose 10.,And it's legitimate monopoly of means of violence,,administrative control, management of public finances,,investment in human capital, provision of citizenship rights,,provision of infrastructure,,management of the tangible and intangible assets of the state,through regulation, creation of the market,,international agreements, including public borrowing,,and then, most importantly, rule of law. 
 I won't elaborate.,I hope the questions will give me an opportunity.,This is a feasible goal,,basically because, contrary to widespread assumption,,I would argue that we know how to do this.,Who would have imagined that Germany,would be either united or democratic today,,if you looked at it from the perspective of Oxford of 1943?,But people at Oxford prepared for a democratic Germany,and engaged in planning.,And there are lots of other examples. 
 Now in order to do this -- and this brings this group --,we have to rethink the notion of capital.,The least important form of capital, in this project,,is financial capital -- money.,Money is not capital in most of the developing countries.,It's just cash.,Because it lacks the institutional,,organizational, managerial forms,to turn it into capital.,And what is required,is a combination of physical capital,,institutional capital, human capital --,and security, of course, is critical,,but so is information. 
 Now, the issue that should concern us here --,and that's the challenge,that I would like to pose to this group --,is again, it takes 16 years,in your countries,to produce somebody with a B.S. degree.,It takes 20 years,to produce somebody with a Ph.D.,The first challenge is to rethink,,fundamentally,,the issue of the time.,Do we need to repeat,the modalities that we have inherited?,Our educational systems are inherited from the 19th century.,What is it that we need to do fundamentally,to re-engage in a project,,that capital formation is rapid?,The absolute majority of the world's population,are below 20,,and they are growing larger and faster.,They need different ways,of being approached,,different ways of being enfranchised,,different ways of being skilled.,And that's the first thing. 
 Second is, you're problem solvers,,but you're not engaging your global responsibility.,You've stayed away,from the problems of corruption.,You only want clean environments in which to function.,But if you don't think through the problems of corruption,,who will?,You stay away from design for development.,You're great designers,,but your designs are selfish.,It's for your own immediate use.,The world in which I operate,operates with designs,regarding roads, or dams,,or provision of electricity,that have not been revisited in 60 years.,This is not right. It requires thinking. 
 But, particularly, what we need,more than anything else from this group,is your imagination,to be brought to bear on problems,the way a meme is supposed to work.,As the work on paradigms, long time ago showed --,Thomas Kuhn's work --,it's in the intersection of ideas,that new developments --,true breakthroughs -- occur.,And I hope that this group,would be able to deal with the issue of state and development,and the empowerment of the majority of the world's poor,,through this means.,Thank you.,(Applause) 
 Chris Anderson: So, Ashraf, until recently,,you were the finance minister of Afghanistan,,a country right at the middle,of much of the world's agenda.,Is the country gonna make it?,Will democracy flourish? What scares you most? 
 Ashraf Ghani: What scares me most is -- is you,,lack of your engagement.,(Laughter),You asked me. You know I always give the unconventional answer.,No. But seriously,,the issue of Afghanistan,first has to be seen as,,at least, a 10- to 20-year perspective.,Today the world of globalization,is on speed.,Time has been compressed.,And space does not exist for most people.,But in my world --,you know, when I went back to Afghanistan after 23 years,,space had expanded.,Every conceivable form of infrastructure had broken down.,I rode -- traveled --,travel between two cities that used to take three hours,now took 12.,So the first is when the scale is that,,we need to recognize,that just the simple things that are infrastructure --,it takes six years to deliver infrastructure.,In our world.,Any meaningful sort of thing.,But the modality of attention,,or what is happening today, what's happening tomorrow. 
 Second is,,when a country has been subjected,to one of the most immense, brutal forms of exercise of power --,we had the Red Army,for 10 continuous years,,110,000 strong,,literally terrorizing.,The sky:,every Afghan,sees the sky as a source of fear.,We were bombed,practically out of existence.,Then, tens of thousands of people were trained in terrorism --,from all sides.,The United States, Great Britain, joined for instance,,Egyptian intelligence service,to train thousands of people,in resistance and urban terrorism.,How to turn a bicycle,into an instrument of terror.,How to turn a donkey, a carthorse, anything.,And the Russians, equally.,So, when violence erupts,in a country like Afghanistan,,it's because of that legacy.,But we have to understand,that we've been incredibly lucky.,I mean, I really can't believe how lucky I am here,,standing in front of you, speaking.,When I joined as finance minister,,I thought that the chances of my living more than three years,would not be more than five percent.,Those were the risks. They were worth it. 
 I think we can make it,,and the reason we can make it,is because of the people.,You see, because, I mean -- I give you one statistic.,91 percent of the men in Afghanistan,,86 percent of the women,,listen to at least three radio stations a day.,In terms of their discourse,,in terms of their sophistication of knowledge of the world,,I think that I would dare say,,they're much more sophisticated,than rural Americans with college degrees,and the bulk of Europeans --,because the world matters to them.,And what is their predominant concern?,Abandonment.,Afghans have become deeply internationalist. 
 You know, when I went back in December of 2001,,I had absolutely no desire to work with the Afghan government,because I'd lived as a nationalist.,And I told them -- my people, with the Americans here --,separate.,Yes, I have an advisory position with the U.N.,I went through 10 Afghan provinces very rapidly.,And everybody was telling me it was a different world.,You know, they engage.,They see engagement, global engagement,,as absolutely necessary to the future of the ordinary people.,And the thing that the ordinary Afghan is most concerned with is --,Clare Lockhart is here,,so I'll recite a discussion she had,with an illiterate woman in Northern Afghanistan.,And that woman said she didn't care,whether she had food on her table.,What she worried about was whether there was a plan for the future,,where her children could really have a different life.,That gives me hope.,CA: How is Afghanistan,going to provide alternative income,to the many people,who are making their living off the drugs trade? 
 AG: Certainly. Well, the first is,,instead of sending a billion dollars,on drug eradication,and paying it to a couple of security companies,,they should give this hundred billion dollars,to 50,of the most critically innovative companies in the world,to ask them to create one million jobs.,The key to the drug eradication is jobs.,Look, there's a very little known fact:,countries that have a legal average income per capita of 1,000 dollars,don't produce drugs. 
 Second, textile.,Trade is the key, not aid.,The U.S. and Europe,should give us a zero percent tariff.,The textile industry is incredibly mobile.,If you want us to be able to compete with China and to attract investment,,we could probably attract,four to six billion dollars,quite easily in the textile sector,,if there was zero tariffs --,would create the type of job.,Cotton does not compete with opium;,a t-shirt does.,And we need to understand, it's the value chain.,Look, the ordinary Afghan is sick and tired,of hearing about microcredit.,It is important,,but what the ordinary women and men who engage in micro-production want,is global access.,They don't want to sell to the charity bazaars,that are only for foreigners --,and the same bloody shirt,embroidered time and again.,What we want is a partnership,with the Italian design firms.,Yeah, we have the best embroiderers in the world!,Why can't we do what was done with northern Italy?,With the Put Out system?,So I think economically,,the critical issue really is to now think through. 
 And what I will say here is that aid doesn't work.,You know, the aid system is broken.,The aid system does not have the knowledge,,the vision, the ability.,I'm all for it; after all, I raised a lot of it.,Yeah, to be exact, you know,,I managed to persuade the world that,they had to give my country 27.5 billion.,They didn't want to give us the money. 
 CA: And it still didn't work? 
 AG: No. It's not that it didn't work.,It's that a dollar of private investment,,in my judgment,,is equal at least to 20 dollars of aid,,in terms of the dynamic that it generates.,Second is that one dollar of aid could be 10 cents;,it could be 20 cents;,or it could be four dollars.,It depends on what form it comes,,what degrees of conditionalities are attached to it.,You know, the aid system, at first, was designed to benefit,entrepreneurs of the developed countries,,not to generate growth in the poor countries.,And this is, again, one of those assumptions --,the way car seats are an assumption,that we've inherited in governments, and doors.,You would think that the US government,would not think that American firms needed subsidizing,to function in developing countries, provide advice,,but they do.,There's an entire weight of history,vis-a-vis aid,that now needs to be reexamined.,If the goal is to build states,that can credibly take care of themselves --,and I'm putting that proposition equally;,you know I'm very harsh on my counterparts --,aid must end,in each country in a definable period.,And every year there must be progress,on mobilization of domestic revenue,and generation of the economy.,Unless that kind of compact is entered into,,you will not be able to sustain the consensus.Once upon a time, there was a dread disease that afflicted children.,And in fact, among all the diseases that existed in this land,,it was the worst. It killed the most children.,And along came a brilliant inventor, a scientist,,who came up with a partial cure for that disease.,And it wasn't perfect. Many children still died,,but it was certainly better than what they had before.,And one of the good things about this cure was that it was free,,virtually free, and was very easy to use.,But the worst thing about it was that you couldn't use it,on the youngest children, on infants, and on one-year-olds. 
 And so, as a consequence, a few years later,,another scientist -- perhaps maybe this scientist,not quite as brilliant as the one who had preceded him,,but building on the invention of the first one --,came up with a second cure.,And the beauty of the second cure for this disease,was that it could be used on infants and one-year-olds.,And the problem with this cure was it was very expensive,,and it was very complicated to use.,And although parents tried as hard as they could to use it properly,,almost all of them ended up using it wrong in the end.,But what they did, of course, since it was so complicated and expensive,,they only used it on the zero-year-olds and the one-year-olds.,And they kept on using the existing cure that they had,on the two-year-olds and up. 
 And this went on for quite some time. People were happy.,They had their two cures. Until a particular mother,,whose child had just turned two, died of this disease.,And she thought to herself, "My child just turned two,,and until the child turned two, I had always used,this complicated, expensive cure, you know, this treatment.,And then the child turned two, and I started using,the cheap and easy treatment, and I wonder" --,and she wondered, like all parents who lose children wonder --,"if there isn't something that I could have done,,like keep on using that complicated, expensive cure.",And she told all the other people, and she said,,"How could it possibly be that something,that's cheap and simple works as well as something,that's complicated and expensive?",And the people thought, "You know, you're right.,It probably is the wrong thing to do to switch,and use the cheap and simple solution.",And the government, they heard her story and the other people,,and they said, "Yeah, you're right, we should make a law.,We should outlaw this cheap and simple treatment,and not let anybody use this on their children.",And the people were happy. They were satisfied. 
 For many years this went along, and everything was fine.,But then along came a lowly economist, who had children himself,,and he used the expensive and complicated treatment.,But he knew about the cheap and simple one.,And he thought about it, and the expensive one,didn't seem that great to him. So he thought,,"I don't know anything about science, but I do know something about data,,so maybe I should go and look at the data,and see whether this expensive and complicated treatment,actually works any better than the cheap and simple one.",And lo and behold, when he went through the data,,he found that it didn't look like the expensive, complicated,solution was any better than the cheap one,,at least for the children who were two and older --,the cheap one still didn't work on the kids who were younger. 
 And so, he went forth to the people and he said,,"I've made this wonderful finding:,it looks as if we could just use the cheap and simple solution,,and by doing so we could save ourselves 300 million dollars a year,,and we could spend that on our children in other ways.",And the parents were very unhappy, and they said,,"This is a terrible thing, because how can the cheap and easy thing,be as good as the hard thing?" And the government was very upset.,And in particular, the people who made this expensive solution,were very upset because they thought,,"How can we hope to compete with something that's essentially free?,We would lose all of our market.",And people were very angry, and they called him horrible names.,And he decided that maybe he should leave the country,for a few days, and seek out some more intelligent,,open-minded people in a place called Oxford,,and come and try and tell the story at that place. 
 And so, anyway, here I am. It's not a fairy tale.,It's a true story about the United States today,,and the disease I'm referring to is actually,motor vehicle accidents for children.,And the free cure is adult seatbelts, and the expensive cure --,the 300-million-dollar-a-year cure -- is child car seats.,And what I'd like to talk to you about today,is some of the evidence why I believe this to be true:,that for children two years old and up,,there really is no real benefit -- proven benefit -- of car seats,,in spite of the incredible energy,that has been devoted toward expanding the laws,and making it socially unacceptable,to put your children into seatbelts. And then talk about why --,what is it that makes that true?,And then, finally talk a little bit about a third way,,about another technology, which is probably better than anything we have,,but which -- there hasn't been any enthusiasm for adoption,precisely because people are so enamored,with the current car seat solution. OK. 
 So, many times when you try to do research on data,,it records complicated stories -- it's hard to find in the data.,It doesn't turn out to be the case when you look at seatbelts versus car seats.,So the United States keeps a data set,of every fatal accident that's happened since 1975.,So in every car crash in which at least one person dies,,they have information on all of the people.,So if you look at that data -- it's right up on the National Highway,Transportation Safety Administration's website --,you can just look at the raw data,,and begin to get a sense of the limited amount of evidence,that's in favor of car seats for children aged two and up.,So, here is the data. Here I have, among two- to six-year-olds --,anyone above six, basically no one uses car seats,,so you can't compare -- 29.3 percent of the children who are unrestrained,in a crash in which at least one person dies, themselves die.,If you put a child in a car seat, 18.2 percent of the children die.,If they're wearing a lap-and-shoulder belt, in this raw data,,19.4 percent die. And interestingly, wearing a lap-only seatbelt,,16.7 percent die. And actually, the theory tells you,that the lap-only seatbelt's got to be worse,than the lap-and-shoulder belt. And that just reminds you,that when you deal with raw data, there are hundreds,of confounding variables that may be getting in the way. 
 So what we do in the study is -- and this is just presenting,the same information, but turned into a figure to make it easier.,So the yellow bar represents car seats,,the orange bar lap-and-shoulder, and the red bar lap-only seatbelts.,And this is all relative to unrestrained --,the bigger the bar, the better. Okay.,So, this is the data I just showed, OK?,So the highest bar is what you're striving to beat.,So you can control for the basic things, like how hard the crash was,,what seat the child was sitting in, etc., the age of the child.,And that's that middle set of bars.,And so, you can see that the lap-only seatbelts,start to look worse once you do that.,And then finally, the last set of bars,,which are really controlling for everything,you could possibly imagine about the crash,,50, 75, 100 different characteristics of the crash. 
 And what you find is that the car seats and the lap-and-shoulder belts,,when it comes to saving lives, fatalities look exactly identical.,And the standard error bands are relatively small around these estimates as well.,And it's not just overall. It's very robust,to anything you want to look at.,One thing that's interesting: if you look at frontal-impact crashes --,when the car crashes, the front hits into something --,indeed, what you see is that the car seats look a little bit better.,And I think this isn't just chance.,In order to have the car seat approved,,you need to pass certain federal standards,,all of which involve slamming your car into a direct frontal crash.,But when you look at other types of crashes, like rear-impact crashes,,indeed, the car seats don't perform as well.,And I think that's because they've been optimized to pass,,as we always expect people to do,,to optimize relative to bright-line rules,about how affected the car will be. 
 And the other thing you might argue is,,"Well, car seats have got a lot better over time.,And so if we look at recent crashes --,the whole data set is almost 30 years' worth of data --,you won't see it in the recent crashes. The new car seats are far, far better.",But indeed, in recent crashes the lap-and-shoulder seatbelts,,actually, are doing even better than the car seats.,They say, "Well, that's impossible, that can't be.",And the line of argument, if you ask parents, is,,"But car seats are so expensive and complicated,,and they have this big tangle of latches,,how could they possibly not work better than seatbelts,because they are so expensive and complicated?",It's kind of an interesting logic,,I think, that people use. And the other logic, they say,,"Well, the government wouldn't have told us [to] use them,if they weren't much better." 
 But what's interesting is the government telling us to use them,is not actually based on very much.,It really is based on some impassioned pleas of parents,whose children died after they turned two,,which has led to the passage of all these laws -- not very much on data.,So you can only get so far, I think, in telling your story,by using these abstract statistics.,And so I had some friends over to dinner, and I was asking --,we had a cookout -- I was asking them what advice they might have for me,about proving my point. They said, "Why don't you run some crash tests?",And I said, "That's a great idea.",So we actually tried to commission some crash tests.,And it turns out that as we called around to the independent,crash test companies around the country,,none of them wanted to do our crash test,because they said, some explicitly, some not so explicitly,,"All of our business comes from car seat manufacturers.,We can't risk alienating them by testing seatbelts relative to car seats." 
 Now, eventually, one did. Under the conditions of anonymity,,they said they would be happy to do this test for us --,so anonymity, and 1,500 dollars per seat that we crashed.,And so, we went to Buffalo, New York,,and here is the precursor to it.,These are the crash test dummies,,waiting for their chance to take the center stage.,And then, here's how the crash test works.,Here, they don't actually crash the entire car, you know --,it's not worth ruining a whole car to do it.,So they just have these bench seats,,and they strap the car seat and the seatbelt onto it.,So I just wanted you to look at this.,And I think this gives you a good idea of why parents think,car seats are so great. Look at the kid in the car seat.,Does he not look content, ready to go,,like he could survive anything? And then, if you look at the kid in back,,it looks like he's already choking before the crash even happens.,It's hard to believe, when you look at this, that,that kid in back is going to do very well when you get in a crash.,So this is going to be a crash,where they're going to slam this thing forward into a wall,at 30 miles an hour, and see what happens. OK? 
 So, let me show you what happens.,These are three-year-old dummies, by the way.,So here -- this is the car seat. Now watch two things:,watch how the head goes forward,,and basically hits the knees -- and this is in the car seat --,and watch how the car seat flies around, in the rebound, up in the air.,The car seat's moving all over the place.,Bear in mind there are two things about this.,This is a car seat that was installed by someone,who has installed 1,000 car seats, who knew exactly how to do it.,And also it turned out these bench seats,are the very best way to install car seats.,Having a flat back makes it much easier to install them.,And so this is a test that's very much rigged in favor of the car seat,,OK? So, that kid in this crash fared very well. 
 The federal standards are,that you have to score below a 1,000,to be an approved car seat on this crash,,in some metric of units which are not important.,And this crash would have been about a 450.,So this car seat was actually an above-average car seat,from Consumer Reports, and did quite well.,So the next one. Now, this is the kid, same crash,,who is in the seatbelt. He hardly moves at all, actually,,relative to the other child. The funny thing is,,the cam work is terrible because they've only set it up,to do the car seats, and so, they actually don't even have a way,to move the camera so you can see the kid that's on the rebound.,Anyway, it turns out that those two crashes, that actually,the three-year-old did slightly worse. So, he gets about a 500,out of -- you know, on this range -- relative to a 400 and something.,But still, if you just took that data from that crash,to the federal government, and said, "I have invented a new car seat.,I would like you to approve it for selling,",then they would say, "This is a fantastic new car seat, it works great.,It only got a 500, it could have gotten as high up as a 1,000.",And this seatbelt would have passed with flying colors,into being approved as a car seat. 
 So, in some sense, what this is suggesting,is that it's not just that people are setting up their car seats wrong,,which is putting children at risk. It's just that, fundamentally,,the car seats aren't doing much.,So here's the crash. So these are timed at the same time,,so you can see that it takes much longer with the car seat --,at rebound, it takes a lot longer --,but there's just a lot less movement for child who's in the seatbelt.,So, I'll show you the six-year-old crashes as well.,The six-year-old is in a car seat, and it turns out,that looks terrible, but that's great. That's like a 400, OK?,So that kid would do fine in the crash.,Nothing about that would have been problematic to the child at all.,And then here's the six-year-old in the seatbelt,,and in fact, they get exactly within, you know,,within one or two points of the same. So really, for the six-year-old,,the car seat did absolutely nothing whatsoever. 
 That's some more evidence, so in some sense --,I was criticized by a scientist, who said, "You could never publish,a study with an n of 4," meaning those four crashes.,So I wrote him back and I said, "What about an n of 45,004?",Because I had the other 45,000 other real-world crashes.,And I just think that it's interesting that the idea,of using real-world crashes, which is very much something,that economists think would be the right thing to do,,is something that scientists don't actually, usually think --,they would rather use a laboratory,,a very imperfect science of looking at the dummies,,than actually 30 years of data of what we've seen,with children and with car seats. 
 And so I think the answer to this puzzle,is that there's a much better solution out there,,that's gotten nobody excited because everyone,is so delighted with the way car seats are presumably working.,And if you think from a design perspective,,about going back to square one, and say,,"I just want to protect kids in the back seat.",I don't there's anyone in this room who'd say,,"Well, the right way to start would be,,let's make a great seat belt for adults.,And then, let's make this really big contraption,that you have to rig up to it in this daisy chain.",I mean, why not start -- who's sitting in the back seat anyway except for kids?,But essentially, do something like this,,which I don't know exactly how much it would cost to do,,but there's no reason I could see,why this should be much more expensive than a regular car seat.,It's just actually -- you see, this is folding up -- it's behind the seat.,You've got a regular seat for adults, and then you fold it down,,and the kid sits on top, and it's integrated.,It seems to me that this can't be a very expensive solution,,and it's got to work better than what we already have. 
 So the question is, is there any hope for adoption of something like this,,which would presumably save a lot of lives?,And I think the answer, perhaps, lies in a story.,The answer both to why has a car seat been so successful,,and why this may someday be adopted or not,,lies in a story that my dad told me, relating to when he was a doctor,in the U.S. Air Force in England. And this is a long time ago:,you were allowed to do things then you can't do today.,So, my father would have patients come in,who he thought were not really sick.,And he had a big jar full of placebo pills that he would give them,,and he'd say, "Come back in a week, if you still feel lousy.",OK, and most of them would not come back,,but some of them would come back.,And when they came back, he, still convinced they were not sick,,had another jar of pills. In this jar were huge horse pills.,They were almost impossible to swallow.,And these, to me, are the analogy for the car seats.,People would look at these and say, "Man, this thing is so big,and so hard to swallow. If this doesn't make me feel better,,you know, what possibly could?" 
 And it turned out that most people wouldn't come back,,because it worked. But every once in a while,,there was still a patient convinced that he was sick,,and he'd come back. And my dad had a third jar of pills.,And the jar of pills he had, he said,,were the tiniest little pills he could find,,so small you could barely see them.,And he would say, listen, I know I gave you that huge pill,,that complicated, hard-to-swallow pill before,,but now I've got one that's so potent,,that is really tiny and small and almost invisible.,It's almost like this thing here, which you can't even see." 
 And it turned out that never,,in all the times my dad gave out this pill, the really tiny pill,,did anyone ever come back still complaining of sickness.,So, my dad always took that as evidence,that this little, teeny, powerful pill,had the ultimate placebo effect. And in some sense, if that's the right story,,I think integrated car seats you will see, very quickly,,becoming something that everyone has. The other possible conclusion,is, well, maybe after coming to my father three times,,getting sent home with placebos, he still felt sick,,he went and found another doctor.,And that's completely possible. And if that's the case,,then I think we're stuck with conventional car seats for a long time to come.,Thank you very much. 
 (Applause) 
 (Audience: I just wanted to ask you, when we wear seatbelts,we don't necessarily wear them just to prevent loss of life,,it's also to prevent lots of serious injury.,Your data looks at fatalities. It doesn't look at serious injury.,Is there any data to show that child seats,are actually less effective, or just as effective as seatbelts,for serious injury? Because that would prove your case.) 
 Steven Levitt: Yeah, that's a great question. In my data, and in another data set,I've looked at for New Jersey crashes,,I find very small differences in injury.,So in this data, it's statistically insignificant differences,in injury between car seats and lap-and-shoulder belts.,In the New Jersey data, which is different,,because it's not just fatal crashes,,but all crashes in New Jersey that are reported,,it turns out that there is a 10 percent difference in injuries,,but generally they're the minor injuries.,Now, what's interesting, I should say this as a disclaimer,,there is medical literature that is very difficult to resolve with this other data,,which suggests that car seats are dramatically better. 
 And they use a completely different methodology that involves --,after the crash occurs, they get from the insurance companies,the names of the people who were in the crash,,and they call them on the phone,,and they asked them what happened.,And I really can't resolve, yet,,and I'd like to work with these medical researchers,to try to understand how there can be these differences,,which are completely at odds with one another.,But it's obviously a critical question.,The question is even if -- are there enough serious injuries,to make these cost-effective? It's kind of tricky.,Even if they're right, it's not so clear,that they're so cost-effective.I'll just take you to Bangladesh for a minute. 
 Before I tell that story, we should ask ourselves the question:,Why does poverty exist?,I mean, there is plenty of knowledge and scientific breakthroughs.,We all live in the same planet,,but there's still a great deal of poverty in the world.,And I think -- so I want to throw a perspective that I have,,so that we can assess this project, or any other project, for that matter,,to see whether it's contributing or --,contributing to poverty or trying to alleviate it. 
 Rich countries have been sending aid to poor countries for the last 60 years.,And by and large, this has failed.,And you can see this book,,written by someone who worked in the World Bank for 20 years,,and he finds economic growth in this country to be elusive.,By and large, it did not work.,So the question is, why is that? 
 In my mind, there is something to learn from the history of Europe.,I mean, even here, yesterday I was walking across the street,,and they showed three bishops were executed 500 years ago,,right across the street from here.,So my point is, there's a lot of struggle has gone in Europe,,where citizens were empowered by technologies.,And they demanded authorities from --,to come down from their high horses.,And in the end, there's better bargaining,between the authorities and citizens,,and democracies, capitalism -- everything else flourished.,And so you can see, the real process of --,and this is backed up by this 500-page book --,that the authorities came down and citizens got up. 
 But if you look, if you have that perspective,,then you can see what happened in the last 60 years.,Aid actually did the opposite.,It empowered authorities,,and, as a result, marginalized citizens.,The authorities did not have the reason to make economic growth happen,so that they could tax people,and make more money for to run their business.,Because they were getting it from abroad.,And in fact, if you see oil-rich countries,,where citizens are not yet empowered, the same thing goes --,Nigeria, Saudi Arabia, all sorts of countries.,Because the aid and oil or mineral money acts the same way.,It empowers authorities, without activating the citizens --,their hands, legs, brains, what have you. 
 And if you agree with that, then I think the best way to improve these countries,is to recognize that economic development is of the people,,by the people, for the people.,And that is the real network effect.,If citizens can network and make themselves more organized and productive,,so that their voices are heard,,so then things would improve. 
 And to contrast that, you can see the most important institution in the world,,the World Bank, is an organization of the government,,by the government, for the governments.,Just see the contrast.,And that is the perspective I have, and then I can start my story. 
 Of course, how would you empower citizens?,There could be all sorts of technologies. And one is cell phones.,Recently "The Economist" recognized this,,but I stumbled upon the idea 12 years ago,,and that's what I've been working on.,So 12 years ago, I was trying to be an investment banker in New York. 
 We had -- quite a few our colleagues were connected by a computer network.,And we got more productive because we didn't have to exchange floppy disks;,we could update each other more often.,But one time it broke down.,And it reminded me of a day in 1971.,There was a war going on in my country.,And my family moved out of an urban place, where we used to live,,to a remote rural area where it was safer.,And one time my mother asked me to get some medicine for a younger sibling.,And I walked 10 miles or so, all morning, to get there, to the medicine man.,And he wasn't there, so I walked all afternoon back.,So I had another unproductive day. 
 So while I was sitting in a tall building in New York,,I put those two experiences together side by side,,and basically concluded that connectivity is productivity --,whether it's in a modern office or an underdeveloped village.,So naturally, I -- the implication of that is,that the telephone is a weapon against poverty.,And if that's the case, then the question is,how many telephones did we have at that time? 
 And it turns out, that there was one telephone in Bangladesh,for every 500 people.,And all those phones were in the few urban places.,The vast rural areas, where 100 million people lived,,there were no telephones.,So just imagine how many man-months or man-years are wasted,,just like I wasted a day.,If you just multiply by 100 million people, let's say losing one day a month,,whatever, and you see a vast amount of resource wasted.,And after all, poor countries, like rich countries, one thing we've got equal,,is their days are the same length: 24 hours.,So if you lose that precious resource,,where you are somewhat equal to the richer countries,,that's a huge waste. 
 So I started looking for any evidence that --,does connectivity really increase productivity?,And I couldn't find much, really, but I found this graph produced by the ITU,,which is the International Telecommunication Union, based in Geneva.,They show an interesting thing.,That you see, the horizontal axis is where you place your country.,So the United States or the UK would be here, outside.,And so the impact of one new telephone,,which is on the vertical axis, is very little. 
 But if you come back to a poorer country, where the GNP per capita is,,let's say, 500 dollars, or 300 dollars,,then the impact is huge: 6,000 dollars. Or 5,000 dollars.,The question was,,how much did it cost to install a new telephone in Bangladesh?,It turns out: 2,000 dollars.,So if you spend 2,000 dollars, and let's say the telephone lasts 10 years,,and if 5,000 dollars every year -- so that's 50,000 dollars. 
 So obviously this was a gadget to have.,And of course, if the cost of installing a telephone is going down,,because there's a digital revolution going on,,then it would be even more dramatic. 
 And I knew a little economics by then --,it says Adam Smith taught us that specialization leads to productivity.,But how would you specialize?,Let's say I'm a fisherman and a farmer.,And Chris is a fisherman farmer. Both are generalists.,So the point is that we could only -- the only way we could depend on each other,,is if we can connect with each other.,And if we are neighbors, I could just walk over to his house. 
 But then we are limiting our economic sphere to something very small area.,But in order to expand that, you need a river,,or you need a highway, or you need telephone lines.,But in any event, it's connectivity that leads to dependability.,And that leads to specialization.,That leads to productivity. 
 So the question was, I started looking at this issue,,and going back and forth between Bangladesh and New York.,There were a lot of reasons people told me,why we don't have enough telephones.,And one of them is the lacking buying power.,Poor people apparently don't have the power to buy. 
 But the point is, if it's a production tool, why do we have to worry about that?,I mean, in America, people buy cars,,and they put very little money down.,They get a car, and they go to work.,The work pays them a salary;,the salary allows them to pay for the car over time.,The car pays for itself. 
 So if the telephone is a production tool,,then we don't quite have to worry about the purchasing power.,And of course, even if that's true, then what about initial buying power?,So then the question is, why can't we have some kind of shared access?,In the United States, we have -- everybody needs a banking service,,but very few of us are trying to buy a bank.,So it's -- a bank tends to serve a whole community.,So we could do that for telephones. 
 And also people told me that we have a lot of important primary needs to meet:,food, clothing, shelter, whatever.,But again, it's very paternalistic.,You should be raising income,and let people decide what they want to do with their money. 
 But the real problem is the lack of other infrastructures.,See, you need some kind of infrastructure to bring a new thing.,For instance, the Internet was booming in the U.S.,because there were -- there were people who had computers.,They had modems.,They had telephone lines, so it's very easy to bring in a new idea, like the Internet.,But that's what's lacking in a poor country. 
 So for example, we didn't have ways to have credit checks,,few banks to collect bills, etc.,But that's why I noticed Grameen Bank, which is a bank for poor people,,and had 1,100 branches, 12,000 employees, 2.3 million borrowers.,And they had these branches.,I thought I could put cell towers and create a network. 
 And anyway, to cut the time short -- so I started --,I first went to them and said,,"You know, perhaps I could connect all your branches and make you more efficient.",But you know, they have, after all, evolved in a country without telephones,,so they are decentralized. I mean, of course there might be other good reasons,,but this was one of the reasons -- they had to be.,And so they were not that interested to connect all their branches,,and then to be -- and rock the boat. 
 So I started focusing. What is it that they really do?,So what happens is that somebody borrows money from the bank.,She typically buys a cow. The cow gives milk.,And she sells the milk to the villagers, and pays off the loan.,And this is a business for her, but it's milk for everybody else. 
 And suddenly I realized that a cell phone could be a cow.,Because some way she could borrow 200 dollars from the bank,,get a phone and have the phone for everybody.,And it's a business for her. 
 So I wrote to the bank, and they thought for a while, and they said,,"It's a little crazy, but logical.,If you think it can be done, come and make it happen.",So I quit my job; I went back to Bangladesh.,I created a company in America called Gonofone,,which in Bengali means "people's phone." 
 And angel investors in America put in money into that.,I flew around the world.,After about a million -- I mean, I got rejected from lots of places,,because I was not only trying to go to a poor country,,I was trying to go to the poor of the poor country. 
 After about a million miles, and a meaningful --,a substantial loss of hair, I eventually put together a consortium, and --,which involved the Norwegian telephone company,,which provided the know-how,,and the Grameen Bank provided the infrastructure to spread the service. 
 To make the story short, here is the coverage of the country.,You can see it's pretty much covered.,Even in Bangladesh, there are some empty places.,But we are also investing around another 300 million dollars this year,to extend that coverage. 
 Now, about that cow model I talked about.,There are about 115,000 people who are retailing telephone services,in their neighborhoods.,And it's serving 52,000 villages, which represent about 80 million people. 
 And these phones are generating,about 100 million dollars for the company.,And two dollars profit per entrepreneur per day, which is like 700 dollars per year. 
 And of course, it's very beneficial in a lot of ways.,It increases income, improves welfare, etc.,And the result is, right now, this company is the largest telephone company,,with 3.5 million subscribers,,115,000 of these phones I talked about --,that produces about a third of the traffic in the network.,And 2004, the net profit, after taxes --,very serious taxes -- was 120 million dollars.,And the company contributed about 190 million dollars to the government coffers. 
 And again, here are some of the lessons.,"The government needs to provide economically viable services.",Actually, this is an instance where private companies can provide that.,"Governments need to subsidize private companies.",This is what some people think.,And actually, private companies help governments with taxes.,"Poor people are recipients.",Poor people are a resource.,"Services cost too much for the poor.",Their involvement reduces the cost.,"The poor are uneducated and cannot do much.",They are very eager learners and very capable survivors.,I've been very surprised.,Most of them learn how to operate a telephone within a day.,"Poor countries need aid.",Businesses -- this one company has raised the --,if the ideal figures are even five percent true, this one company,is raising the GNP of the country much more than the aid the country receives.,And as I was trying to show you, as far as I'm concerned,,aid does damages because it removes the government from its citizens. 
 And this is a new project I have with Dean Kamen, the famous inventor in America.,He has produced some power generators,,which we are now doing an experiment in Bangladesh,,in two villages where cow manure is producing biogas,,which is running these generators.,And each of these generators is selling electricity to 20 houses each.,It's just an experiment.,We don't know how far it will go,,but it's going on. 
 Thank you.18 minutes is an absolutely brutal time limit,,so I'm going to dive straight in, right at the point,where I get this thing to work.,Here we go. I'm going to talk about five different things.,I'm going to talk about why defeating aging is desirable.,I'm going to talk about why we have to get our shit together,,and actually talk about this a bit more than we do.,I'm going to talk about feasibility as well, of course.,I'm going to talk about why we are so fatalistic,about doing anything about aging.,And then I'm going spend perhaps the second half of the talk,talking about, you know, how we might actually be able to prove that fatalism is wrong,,namely, by actually doing something about it. 
 I'm going to do that in two steps.,The first one I'm going to talk about is,how to get from a relatively modest amount of life extension --,which I'm going to define as 30 years, applied to people,who are already in middle-age when you start --,to a point which can genuinely be called defeating aging.,Namely, essentially an elimination of the relationship between,how old you are and how likely you are to die in the next year --,or indeed, to get sick in the first place.,And of course, the last thing I'm going to talk about,is how to reach that intermediate step,,that point of maybe 30 years life extension. 
 So I'm going to start with why we should.,Now, I want to ask a question.,Hands up: anyone in the audience who is in favor of malaria?,That was easy. OK.,OK. Hands up: anyone in the audience,who's not sure whether malaria is a good thing or a bad thing?,OK. So we all think malaria is a bad thing.,That's very good news, because I thought that was what the answer would be.,Now the thing is, I would like to put it to you,that the main reason why we think that malaria is a bad thing,is because of a characteristic of malaria that it shares with aging.,And here is that characteristic.,The only real difference is that aging kills considerably more people than malaria does. 
 Now, I like in an audience, in Britain especially,,to talk about the comparison with foxhunting,,which is something that was banned after a long struggle,,by the government not very many months ago.,I mean, I know I'm with a sympathetic audience here,,but, as we know, a lot of people are not entirely persuaded by this logic.,And this is actually a rather good comparison, it seems to me.,You know, a lot of people said, "Well, you know,,city boys have no business telling us rural types what to do with our time.,It's a traditional part of the way of life,,and we should be allowed to carry on doing it.,It's ecologically sound; it stops the population explosion of foxes.",But ultimately, the government prevailed in the end,,because the majority of the British public,,and certainly the majority of members of Parliament,,came to the conclusion that it was really something,that should not be tolerated in a civilized society. 
 And I think that human aging shares,all of these characteristics in spades.,What part of this do people not understand?,It's not just about life, of course --,(Laughter) --,it's about healthy life, you know --,getting frail and miserable and dependent is no fun,,whether or not dying may be fun.,So really, this is how I would like to describe it.,It's a global trance.,These are the sorts of unbelievable excuses,that people give for aging.,And, I mean, OK, I'm not actually saying,that these excuses are completely valueless.,There are some good points to be made here,,things that we ought to be thinking about, forward planning,so that nothing goes too -- well, so that we minimize,the turbulence when we actually figure out how to fix aging. 
 But these are completely crazy, when you actually,remember your sense of proportion.,You know, these are arguments; these are things that,would be legitimate to be concerned about.,But the question is, are they so dangerous --,these risks of doing something about aging --,that they outweigh the downside of doing the opposite,,namely, leaving aging as it is?,Are these so bad that they outweigh,condemning 100,000 people a day to an unnecessarily early death?,You know, if you haven't got an argument that's that strong,,then just don't waste my time, is what I say.,(Laughter) 
 Now, there is one argument,that some people do think really is that strong, and here it is.,People worry about overpopulation; they say,,"Well, if we fix aging, no one's going to die to speak of,,or at least the death toll is going to be much lower,,only from crossing St. Giles carelessly.,And therefore, we're not going to be able to have many kids,,and kids are really important to most people.",And that's true.,And you know, a lot of people try to fudge this question,,and give answers like this.,I don't agree with those answers. I think they basically don't work.,I think it's true, that we will face a dilemma in this respect.,We will have to decide whether to have a low birth rate,,or a high death rate.,A high death rate will, of course, arise from simply rejecting these therapies,,in favor of carrying on having a lot of kids. 
 And, I say that that's fine --,the future of humanity is entitled to make that choice.,What's not fine is for us to make that choice on behalf of the future.,If we vacillate, hesitate,,and do not actually develop these therapies,,then we are condemning a whole cohort of people --,who would have been young enough and healthy enough,to benefit from those therapies, but will not be,,because we haven't developed them as quickly as we could --,we'll be denying those people an indefinite life span,,and I consider that that is immoral.,That's my answer to the overpopulation question. 
 Right. So the next thing is,,now why should we get a little bit more active on this?,And the fundamental answer is that,the pro-aging trance is not as dumb as it looks.,It's actually a sensible way of coping with the inevitability of aging.,Aging is ghastly, but it's inevitable, so, you know,,we've got to find some way to put it out of our minds,,and it's rational to do anything that we might want to do, to do that.,Like, for example, making up these ridiculous reasons,why aging is actually a good thing after all.,But of course, that only works when we have both of these components.,And as soon as the inevitability bit becomes a little bit unclear --,and we might be in range of doing something about aging --,this becomes part of the problem.,This pro-aging trance is what stops us from agitating about these things.,And that's why we have to really talk about this a lot --,evangelize, I will go so far as to say, quite a lot --,in order to get people's attention, and make people realize,that they are in a trance in this regard.,So that's all I'm going to say about that. 
 I'm now going to talk about feasibility.,And the fundamental reason, I think, why we feel that aging is inevitable,is summed up in a definition of aging that I'm giving here.,A very simple definition.,Aging is a side effect of being alive in the first place,,which is to say, metabolism.,This is not a completely tautological statement;,it's a reasonable statement.,Aging is basically a process that happens to inanimate objects like cars,,and it also happens to us,,despite the fact that we have a lot of clever self-repair mechanisms,,because those self-repair mechanisms are not perfect. 
 So basically, metabolism, which is defined as,basically everything that keeps us alive from one day to the next,,has side effects.,Those side effects accumulate and eventually cause pathology.,That's a fine definition. So we can put it this way:,we can say that, you know, we have this chain of events.,And there are really two games in town,,according to most people, with regard to postponing aging.,They're what I'm calling here the "gerontology approach" and the "geriatrics approach.",The geriatrician will intervene late in the day,,when pathology is becoming evident,,and the geriatrician will try and hold back the sands of time,,and stop the accumulation of side effects,from causing the pathology quite so soon.,Of course, it's a very short-term-ist strategy; it's a losing battle,,because the things that are causing the pathology,are becoming more abundant as time goes on. 
 The gerontology approach looks much more promising on the surface,,because, you know, prevention is better than cure.,But unfortunately the thing is that we don't understand metabolism very well.,In fact, we have a pitifully poor understanding of how organisms work --,even cells we're not really too good on yet.,We've discovered things like, for example,,RNA interference only a few years ago,,and this is a really fundamental component of how cells work.,Basically, gerontology is a fine approach in the end,,but it is not an approach whose time has come,when we're talking about intervention.,So then, what do we do about that?,I mean, that's a fine logic, that sounds pretty convincing,,pretty ironclad, doesn't it? 
 But it isn't.,Before I tell you why it isn't, I'm going to go a little bit,into what I'm calling step two.,Just suppose, as I said, that we do acquire --,let's say we do it today for the sake of argument --,the ability to confer 30 extra years of healthy life,on people who are already in middle age, let's say 55.,I'm going to call that "robust human rejuvenation." OK.,What would that actually mean,for how long people of various ages today --,or equivalently, of various ages at the time that these therapies arrive --,would actually live?,In order to answer that question -- you might think it's simple,,but it's not simple.,We can't just say, "Well, if they're young enough to benefit from these therapies,,then they'll live 30 years longer.",That's the wrong answer.,And the reason it's the wrong answer is because of progress. 
 There are two sorts of technological progress really,,for this purpose.,There are fundamental, major breakthroughs,,and there are incremental refinements of those breakthroughs.,Now, they differ a great deal,in terms of the predictability of time frames.,Fundamental breakthroughs:,very hard to predict how long it's going to take,to make a fundamental breakthrough.,It was a very long time ago that we decided that flying would be fun,,and it took us until 1903 to actually work out how to do it.,But after that, things were pretty steady and pretty uniform.,I think this is a reasonable sequence of events that happened,in the progression of the technology of powered flight.,We can think, really, that each one is sort of,beyond the imagination of the inventor of the previous one, if you like.,The incremental advances have added up to something,which is not incremental anymore. 
 This is the sort of thing you see after a fundamental breakthrough.,And you see it in all sorts of technologies.,Computers: you can look at a more or less parallel time line,,happening of course a bit later.,You can look at medical care. I mean, hygiene, vaccines, antibiotics --,you know, the same sort of time frame.,So I think that actually step two, that I called a step a moment ago,,isn't a step at all.,That in fact, the people who are young enough,to benefit from these first therapies,that give this moderate amount of life extension,,even though those people are already middle-aged when the therapies arrive,,will be at some sort of cusp.,They will mostly survive long enough to receive improved treatments,that will give them a further 30 or maybe 50 years.,In other words, they will be staying ahead of the game.,The therapies will be improving faster than,the remaining imperfections in the therapies are catching up with us. 
 This is a very important point for me to get across.,Because, you know, most people, when they hear,that I predict that a lot of people alive today are going to live to 1,000 or more,,they think that I'm saying that we're going to invent therapies in the next few decades,that are so thoroughly eliminating aging,that those therapies will let us live to 1,000 or more.,I'm not saying that at all.,I'm saying that the rate of improvement of those therapies,will be enough.,They'll never be perfect, but we'll be able to fix the things,that 200-year-olds die of, before we have any 200-year-olds.,And the same for 300 and 400 and so on.,I decided to give this a little name,,which is "longevity escape velocity.",(Laughter),Well, it seems to get the point across. 
 So, these trajectories here are basically how we would expect people to live,,in terms of remaining life expectancy,,as measured by their health,,for given ages that they were at the time that these therapies arrive.,If you're already 100, or even if you're 80 --,and an average 80-year-old,,we probably can't do a lot for you with these therapies,,because you're too close to death's door,for the really initial, experimental therapies to be good enough for you.,You won't be able to withstand them.,But if you're only 50, then there's a chance,that you might be able to pull out of the dive and, you know --,(Laughter) --,eventually get through this,and start becoming biologically younger in a meaningful sense,,in terms of your youthfulness, both physical and mental,,and in terms of your risk of death from age-related causes.,And of course, if you're a bit younger than that,,then you're never really even going,to get near to being fragile enough to die of age-related causes. 
 So this is a genuine conclusion that I come to, that the first 150-year-old --,we don't know how old that person is today,,because we don't know how long it's going to take,to get these first-generation therapies.,But irrespective of that age,,I'm claiming that the first person to live to 1,000 --,subject of course, to, you know, global catastrophes --,is actually, probably, only about 10 years younger than the first 150-year-old.,And that's quite a thought. 
 Alright, so finally I'm going to spend the rest of the talk,,my last seven-and-a-half minutes, on step one;,namely, how do we actually get to this moderate amount of life extension,that will allow us to get to escape velocity?,And in order to do that, I need to talk about mice a little bit.,I have a corresponding milestone to robust human rejuvenation.,I'm calling it "robust mouse rejuvenation," not very imaginatively.,And this is what it is.,I say we're going to take a long-lived strain of mouse,,which basically means mice that live about three years on average.,We do exactly nothing to them until they're already two years old.,And then we do a whole bunch of stuff to them,,and with those therapies, we get them to live,,on average, to their fifth birthday.,So, in other words, we add two years --,we treble their remaining lifespan,,starting from the point that we started the therapies. 
 The question then is, what would that actually mean for the time frame,until we get to the milestone I talked about earlier for humans?,Which we can now, as I've explained,,equivalently call either robust human rejuvenation or longevity escape velocity.,Secondly, what does it mean for the public's perception,of how long it's going to take for us to get to those things,,starting from the time we get the mice?,And thirdly, the question is, what will it do,to actually how much people want it?,And it seems to me that the first question,is entirely a biology question,,and it's extremely hard to answer.,One has to be very speculative,,and many of my colleagues would say that we should not do this speculation,,that we should simply keep our counsel until we know more. 
 I say that's nonsense.,I say we absolutely are irresponsible if we stay silent on this.,We need to give our best guess as to the time frame,,in order to give people a sense of proportion,so that they can assess their priorities.,So, I say that we have a 50/50 chance,of reaching this RHR milestone,,robust human rejuvenation, within 15 years from the point,that we get to robust mouse rejuvenation.,15 years from the robust mouse.,The public's perception will probably be somewhat better than that.,The public tends to underestimate how difficult scientific things are.,So they'll probably think it's five years away.,They'll be wrong, but that actually won't matter too much.,And finally, of course, I think it's fair to say,that a large part of the reason why the public is so ambivalent about aging now,is the global trance I spoke about earlier, the coping strategy.,That will be history at this point,,because it will no longer be possible to believe that aging is inevitable in humans,,since it's been postponed so very effectively in mice.,So we're likely to end up with a very strong change in people's attitudes,,and of course that has enormous implications. 
 So in order to tell you now how we're going to get these mice,,I'm going to add a little bit to my description of aging.,I'm going to use this word "damage",to denote these intermediate things that are caused by metabolism,and that eventually cause pathology.,Because the critical thing about this,is that even though the damage only eventually causes pathology,,the damage itself is caused ongoing-ly throughout life, starting before we're born.,But it is not part of metabolism itself.,And this turns out to be useful.,Because we can re-draw our original diagram this way.,We can say that, fundamentally, the difference between gerontology and geriatrics,is that gerontology tries to inhibit the rate,at which metabolism lays down this damage.,And I'm going to explain exactly what damage is,in concrete biological terms in a moment.,And geriatricians try to hold back the sands of time,by stopping the damage converting into pathology.,And the reason it's a losing battle,is because the damage is continuing to accumulate. 
 So there's a third approach, if we look at it this way.,We can call it the "engineering approach,",and I claim that the engineering approach is within range.,The engineering approach does not intervene in any processes.,It does not intervene in this process or this one.,And that's good because it means that it's not a losing battle,,and it's something that we are within range of being able to do,,because it doesn't involve improving on evolution.,The engineering approach simply says,,"Let's go and periodically repair all of these various types of damage --,not necessarily repair them completely, but repair them quite a lot,,so that we keep the level of damage down below the threshold,that must exist, that causes it to be pathogenic.",We know that this threshold exists,,because we don't get age-related diseases until we're in middle age,,even though the damage has been accumulating since before we were born. 
 Why do I say that we're in range? Well, this is basically it.,The point about this slide is actually the bottom.,If we try to say which bits of metabolism are important for aging,,we will be here all night, because basically all of metabolism,is important for aging in one way or another.,This list is just for illustration; it is incomplete.,The list on the right is also incomplete.,It's a list of types of pathology that are age-related,,and it's just an incomplete list.,But I would like to claim to you that this list in the middle is actually complete --,this is the list of types of thing that qualify as damage,,side effects of metabolism that cause pathology in the end,,or that might cause pathology.,And there are only seven of them.,They're categories of things, of course, but there's only seven of them.,Cell loss, mutations in chromosomes, mutations in the mitochondria and so on. 
 First of all, I'd like to give you an argument for why that list is complete.,Of course one can make a biological argument.,One can say, "OK, what are we made of?",We're made of cells and stuff between cells.,What can damage accumulate in?,The answer is: long-lived molecules,,because if a short-lived molecule undergoes damage, but then the molecule is destroyed --,like by a protein being destroyed by proteolysis -- then the damage is gone, too.,It's got to be long-lived molecules.,So, these seven things were all under discussion in gerontology a long time ago,and that is pretty good news, because it means that,,you know, we've come a long way in biology in these 20 years,,so the fact that we haven't extended this list,is a pretty good indication that there's no extension to be done.,However, it's better than that; we actually know how to fix them all,,in mice, in principle -- and what I mean by in principle is,,we probably can actually implement these fixes within a decade.,Some of them are partially implemented already, the ones at the top. 
 I haven't got time to go through them at all, but,my conclusion is that, if we can actually get suitable funding for this,,then we can probably develop robust mouse rejuvenation in only 10 years,,but we do need to get serious about it.,We do need to really start trying.,So of course, there are some biologists in the audience,,and I want to give some answers to some of the questions that you may have.,You may have been dissatisfied with this talk,,but fundamentally you have to go and read this stuff.,I've published a great deal on this;,I cite the experimental work on which my optimism is based,,and there's quite a lot of detail there.,The detail is what makes me confident,of my rather aggressive time frames that I'm predicting here.,So if you think that I'm wrong,,you'd better damn well go and find out why you think I'm wrong. 
 And of course the main thing is that you shouldn't trust people,who call themselves gerontologists because,,as with any radical departure from previous thinking within a particular field,,you know, you expect people in the mainstream to be a bit resistant,and not really to take it seriously.,So, you know, you've got to actually do your homework,,in order to understand whether this is true. 
 And we'll just end with a few things.,One thing is, you know, you'll be hearing from a guy in the next session,who said some time ago that he could sequence the human genome in half no time,,and everyone said, "Well, it's obviously impossible.",And you know what happened.,So, you know, this does happen.,We have various strategies -- there's the Methuselah Mouse Prize,,which is basically an incentive to innovate,,and to do what you think is going to work,,and you get money for it if you win.,There's a proposal to actually put together an institute.,This is what's going to take a bit of money.,But, I mean, look -- how long does it take to spend that on the war in Iraq?,Not very long. OK.,(Laughter),It's got to be philanthropic, because profits distract biotech,,but it's basically got a 90 percent chance, I think, of succeeding in this.,And I think we know how to do it. And I'll stop there.,Thank you.,(Applause) 
 Chris Anderson: OK. I don't know if there's going to be any questions,but I thought I would give people the chance.,Audience: Since you've been talking about aging and trying to defeat it,,why is it that you make yourself appear like an old man?,(Laughter) 
 AG: Because I am an old man. I am actually 158.,(Laughter),(Applause) 
 Audience: Species on this planet have evolved with immune systems,to fight off all the diseases so that individuals live long enough to procreate.,However, as far as I know, all the species have evolved to actually die,,so when cells divide, the telomerase get shorter, and eventually species die.,So, why does -- evolution has -- seems to have selected against immortality,,when it is so advantageous, or is evolution just incomplete? 
 AG: Brilliant. Thank you for asking a question,that I can answer with an uncontroversial answer.,I'm going to tell you the genuine mainstream answer to your question,,which I happen to agree with,,which is that, no, aging is not a product of selection, evolution;,[aging] is simply a product of evolutionary neglect.,In other words, we have aging because it's hard work not to have aging;,you need more genetic pathways, more sophistication in your genes,in order to age more slowly,,and that carries on being true the longer you push it out.,So, to the extent that evolution doesn't matter,,doesn't care whether genes are passed on by individuals,,living a long time or by procreation,,there's a certain amount of modulation of that,,which is why different species have different lifespans,,but that's why there are no immortal species. 
 CA: The genes don't care but we do? 
 AG: That's right. 
 Audience: Hello. I read somewhere that in the last 20 years,,the average lifespan of basically anyone on the planet has grown by 10 years.,If I project that, that would make me think,that I would live until 120 if I don't crash on my motorbike.,That means that I'm one of your subjects to become a 1,000-year-old? 
 AG: If you lose a bit of weight.,(Laughter),Your numbers are a bit out.,The standard numbers are that lifespans,have been growing at between one and two years per decade.,So, it's not quite as good as you might think, you might hope.,But I intend to move it up to one year per year as soon as possible. 
 Audience: I was told that many of the brain cells we have as adults,are actually in the human embryo,,and that the brain cells last 80 years or so.,If that is indeed true,,biologically are there implications in the world of rejuvenation?,If there are cells in my body that live all 80 years,,as opposed to a typical, you know, couple of months? 
 AG: There are technical implications certainly.,Basically what we need to do is replace cells,in those few areas of the brain that lose cells at a respectable rate,,especially neurons, but we don't want to replace them,any faster than that -- or not much faster anyway,,because replacing them too fast would degrade cognitive function.,What I said about there being no non-aging species earlier on,was a little bit of an oversimplification.,There are species that have no aging -- Hydra for example --,but they do it by not having a nervous system --,and not having any tissues in fact that rely for their function,on very long-lived cells.What I'm going to do, in the spirit of collaborative creativity,,is simply repeat many of the points,that the three people before me have already made,,but do them --,this is called "creative collaboration;",it's actually called "borrowing" --,but do it through a particular perspective,,and that is to ask about the role of users and consumers,in this emerging world of,collaborative creativity,that Jimmy and others have talked about. 
 Let me just ask you, to start with,,this simple question:,who invented the mountain bike?,Because traditional economic theory would say,,well, the mountain bike was probably invented by some big bike corporation,that had a big R&D lab,where they were thinking up new projects,,and it came out of there. It didn't come from there.,Another answer might be, well, it came from a sort of lone genius,working in his garage, who,,working away on different kinds of bikes, comes up,with a bike out of thin air. 
 It didn't come from there. The mountain bike,came from users, came from young users,,particularly a group in Northern California,,who were frustrated with traditional racing bikes,,which were those sort of bikes that Eddy Merckx rode,,or your big brother, and they're very glamorous.,But also frustrated with the bikes that your dad rode,,which sort of had big handlebars like that, and they were too heavy.,So, they got the frames from these big bikes,,put them together with the gears from the racing bikes,,got the brakes from motorcycles,,and sort of mixed and matched various ingredients.,And for the first, I don't know, three to five years of their life,,mountain bikes were known as "clunkers.",And they were just made in a community of bikers,,mainly in Northern California. 
 And then one of these companies that was importing parts,for the clunkers decided to set up in business,,start selling them to other people,,and gradually another company emerged out of that, Marin,,and it probably was, I don't know,,10, maybe even 15, years,,before the big bike companies,realized there was a market.,Thirty years later,,mountain bike sales,and mountain bike equipment,account for 65 percent of bike sales in America.,That's 58 billion dollars. 
 This is a category entirely created by consumers,that would not have been created by the mainstream bike market,because they couldn't see the need,,the opportunity;,they didn't have the incentive to innovate.,The one thing I think I disagree with,about Yochai's presentation,is when he said the Internet causes,this distributive capacity for innovation to come alive.,It's when the Internet combines,with these kinds of passionate pro-am consumers --,who are knowledgeable; they've got the incentive to innovate;,they've got the tools; they want to --,that you get this kind of explosion,of creative collaboration.,And out of that, you get the need for the kind of things,that Jimmy was talking about, which is our new kinds of organization,,or a better way to put it:,how do we organize ourselves without organizations?,That's now possible; you don't need an organization to be organized,,to achieve large and complex tasks,,like innovating new software programs. 
 So this is a huge challenge,to the way we think creativity comes about.,The traditional view, still enshrined,in much of the way that we think about creativity,-- in organizations, in government --,is that creativity is about special people:,wear baseball caps the wrong way round,,come to conferences like this, in special places,,elite universities, R&D labs in the forests, water,,maybe special rooms in companies painted funny colors,,you know, bean bags, maybe the odd table-football table.,Special people, special places, think up special ideas,,then you have a pipeline that takes the ideas,down to the waiting consumers, who are passive.,They can say "yes" or "no" to the invention.,That's the idea of creativity.,What's the policy recommendation out of that,if you're in government, or you're running a large company?,More special people, more special places.,Build creative clusters in cities;,create more R&D parks, so on and so forth.,Expand the pipeline down to the consumers. 
 Well this view, I think, is increasingly wrong.,I think it's always been wrong,,because I think always creativity has been highly collaborative,,and it's probably been largely interactive.,But it's increasingly wrong, and one of the reasons it's wrong,is that the ideas are flowing back up the pipeline.,The ideas are coming back from the consumers,,and they're often ahead of the producers.,Why is that?,Well, one issue,is that radical innovation,,when you've got ideas that,affect a large number of technologies or people,,have a great deal of uncertainty attached to them.,The payoffs to innovation are greatest,where the uncertainty is highest.,And when you get a radical innovation,,it's often very uncertain how it can be applied. 
 The whole history of telephony,is a story of dealing with that uncertainty.,The very first landline telephones,,the inventors thought,that they would be used for people to listen in,to live performances,from West End theaters.,When the mobile telephone companies invented SMS,,they had no idea what it was for;,it was only when that technology got into the hands,of teenage users,that they invented the use. 
 So the more radical the innovation,,the more the uncertainty,,the more you need innovation in use,to work out what a technology is for.,All of our patents, our entire approach,to patents and invention, is based on the idea,that the inventor knows what the invention is for;,we can say what it's for.,More and more, the inventors of things,will not be able to say that in advance.,It will be worked out in use,,in collaboration with users.,We like to think that invention is,a sort of moment of creation:,there is a moment of birth when someone comes up with an idea.,The truth is that most creativity,is cumulative and collaborative;,like Wikipedia, it develops over a long period of time. 
 The second reason why users are more and more important,is that they are the source of big, disruptive innovations.,If you want to find the big new ideas,,it's often difficult to find them in mainstream markets,,in big organizations.,And just look inside large organizations,and you'll see why that is so.,So, you're in a big corporation.,You're obviously keen to go up the corporate ladder.,Do you go into your board and say,,"Look, I've got a fantastic idea,for an embryonic product,in a marginal market,,with consumers we've never dealt with before,,and I'm not sure it's going to have a big payoff, but it could be really, really big in the future?",No, what you do, is you go in and you say,,"I've got a fantastic idea for an incremental innovation,to an existing product we sell through existing channels,to existing users, and I can guarantee,you get this much return out of it over the next three years." 
 Big corporations have an in-built tendency,to reinforce past success.,They've got so much sunk in it,that it's very difficult for them to spot,emerging new markets. Emerging new markets, then,,are the breeding grounds for passionate users.,Best example:,who in the music industry,,30 years ago, would have said,,"Yes, let's invent a musical form,which is all about dispossessed black men,in ghettos expressing their frustration,with the world through a form of music,that many people find initially quite difficult to listen to.,That sounds like a winner; we'll go with it.",(Laughter).,So what happens? Rap music is created by the users.,They do it on their own tapes, with their own recording equipment;,they distribute it themselves.,30 years later,,rap music is the dominant musical form of popular culture --,would never have come from the big companies.,Had to start -- this is the third point --,with these pro-ams. 
 This is the phrase that I've used in,some stuff which I've done,with a think tank in London called Demos,,where we've been looking at these people who are amateurs --,i.e., they do it for the love of it --,but they want to do it to very high standards.,And across a whole range of fields --,from software, astronomy,,natural sciences,,vast areas of leisure and culture,like kite-surfing, so on and so forth --,you find people who want to do things because they love it,,but they want to do these things to very high standards.,They work at their leisure, if you like.,They take their leisure very seriously:,they acquire skills; they invest time;,they use technology that's getting cheaper -- it's not just the Internet:,cameras, design technology,,leisure technology, surfboards, so on and so forth.,Largely through globalization,,a lot of this equipment has got a lot cheaper.,More knowledgeable consumers, more educated,,more able to connect with one another,,more able to do things together.,Consumption, in that sense, is an expression,of their productive potential.,Why, we found, people were interested in this,,is that at work they don't feel very expressed.,They don't feel as if they're doing something that really matters to them,,so they pick up these kinds of activities.,This has huge organizational implications,for very large areas of life. 
 Take astronomy as an example,,which Yochai has already mentioned.,Twenty years ago, 30 years ago,,only big professional astronomers,with very big telescopes could see far into space.,And there's a big telescope in Northern England called Jodrell Bank,,and when I was a kid, it was amazing,,because the moon shots would take off, and this thing would move on rails.,And it was huge -- it was absolutely enormous.,Now, six,amateur astronomers, working with the Internet,,with Dobsonian digital telescopes --,which are pretty much open source --,with some light sensors,developed over the last 10 years, the Internet --,they can do what Jodrell Bank could only do 30 years ago.,So here in astronomy, you have this vast explosion,of new productive resources.,The users can be producers. 
 What does this mean, then, for our,organizational landscape?,Well, just imagine a world,,for the moment, divided into two camps.,Over here, you've got the old, traditional corporate model:,special people, special places;,patent it, push it down the pipeline,to largely waiting, passive consumers.,Over here, let's imagine we've got,Wikipedia, Linux, and beyond -- open source.,This is open; this is closed.,This is new; this is traditional.,Well, the first thing you can say, I think with certainty,,is what Yochai has said already --,is there is a great big struggle,between those two organizational forms.,These people over there will do everything they can,to stop these kinds of organizations succeeding,,because they're threatened by them.,And so the debates about,copyright, digital rights, so on and so forth --,these are all about trying to stifle, in my view,,these kinds of organizations.,What we're seeing is a complete corruption,of the idea of patents and copyright.,Meant to be a way to incentivize invention,,meant to be a way to orchestrate the dissemination of knowledge,,they are increasingly being used by large companies,to create thickets of patents,to prevent innovation taking place. 
 Let me just give you two examples.,The first is: imagine yourself going to a venture capitalist,and saying, "I've got a fantastic idea.,I've invented this brilliant new program,that is much, much better than Microsoft Outlook.",Which venture capitalist in their right mind is going to give you any money to set up a venture,competing with Microsoft, with Microsoft Outlook? No one.,That is why the competition with Microsoft is bound to come --,will only come --,from an open-source kind of project. 
 So, there is a huge competitive argument,about sustaining the capacity,for open-source and consumer-driven innovation,,because it's one of the greatest,competitive levers against monopoly.,There'll be huge professional arguments as well.,Because the professionals, over here,in these closed organizations --,they might be academics; they might be programmers;,they might be doctors; they might be journalists --,my former profession --,say, "No, no -- you can't trust these people over here." 
 When I started in journalism --,Financial Times, 20 years ago --,it was very, very exciting,to see someone reading the newspaper.,And you'd kind of look over their shoulder on the Tube,to see if they were reading your article.,Usually they were reading the share prices,,and the bit of the paper with your article on,was on the floor, or something like that,,and you know, "For heaven's sake, what are they doing!,They're not reading my brilliant article!",And we allowed users, readers,,two places where they could contribute to the paper:,the letters page, where they could write a letter in,,and we would condescend to them, cut it in half,,and print it three days later.,Or the op-ed page, where if they knew the editor --,had been to school with him, slept with his wife --,they could write an article for the op-ed page.,Those were the two places. 
 Shock, horror: now, the readers want to be writers and publishers.,That's not their role; they're supposed to read what we write.,But they don't want to be journalists. The journalists think,that the bloggers want to be journalists;,they don't want to be journalists; they just want to have a voice.,They want to, as Jimmy said, they want to have a dialogue, a conversation.,They want to be part of that flow of information.,What's happening there is that the whole domain,of creativity is expanding.,So, there's going to be a tremendous struggle.,But, also, there's going to be tremendous movement,from the open to the closed. 
 What you'll see, I think, is two things that are critical,,and these, I think, are two challenges,for the open movement.,The first is:,can we really survive on volunteers?,If this is so critical,,do we not need it funded, organized, supported,in much more structured ways?,I think the idea of creating the Red Cross,for information and knowledge is a fantastic idea,,but can we really organize that, just on volunteers?,What kind of changes do we need in public policy,and funding to make that possible?,What's the role of the BBC,,for instance, in that world?,What should be the role of public policy?,And finally, what I think you will see,is the intelligent, closed organizations,moving increasingly in the open direction.,So it's not going to be a contest between two camps,,but, in between them, you'll find all sorts of interesting places,that people will occupy.,New organizational models coming about,,mixing closed and open in tricky ways.,It won't be so clear-cut; it won't be Microsoft versus Linux --,there'll be all sorts of things in between.,And those organizational models, it turns out,,are incredibly powerful,,and the people who can understand them,will be very, very successful. 
 Let me just give you one final example,of what that means.,I was in Shanghai,,in an office block,built on what was a rice paddy five years ago --,one of the 2,500 skyscrapers,they've built in Shanghai in the last 10 years.,And I was having dinner with this guy called Timothy Chan.,Timothy Chan set up an Internet business,in 2000.,Didn't go into the Internet, kept his money,,decided to go into computer games.,He runs a company called Shanda,,which is the largest computer games company in China.,Nine thousand servers all over China,,has 250 million subscribers.,At any one time, there are four million people playing one of his games.,How many people does he employ,to service that population?,500 people.,Well, how can he service,250 million people from 500 employees?,Because basically, he doesn't service them.,He gives them a platform;,he gives them some rules; he gives them the tools,and then he kind of orchestrates the conversation;,he orchestrates the action.,But actually, a lot of the content,is created by the users themselves.,And it creates a kind of stickiness,between the community and the company,which is really, really powerful. 
 The best measure of that: so you go into one of his games,,you create a character,that you develop in the course of the game.,If, for some reason, your credit card bounces,,or there's some other problem,,you lose your character.,You've got two options.,One option: you can create a new character,,right from scratch, but with none of the history of your player.,That costs about 100 dollars.,Or you can get on a plane, fly to Shanghai,,queue up outside Shanda's offices --,cost probably 600, 700 dollars --,and reclaim your character, get your history back.,Every morning, there are 600 people queuing,outside their offices,to reclaim these characters. (Laughter),So this is about companies built on communities,,that provide communities with tools,,resources, platforms in which they can share.,He's not open source,,but it's very, very powerful. 
 So here is one of the challenges, I think,,for people like me, who,do a lot of work with government.,If you're a games company,,and you've got a million players in your game,,you only need one percent of them,to be co-developers, contributing ideas,,and you've got a development workforce,of 10,000 people.,Imagine you could take all the children,in education in Britain, and one percent of them,were co-developers of education.,What would that do to the resources available,to the education system?,Or if you got one percent of the patients in the NHS,to, in some sense, be co-producers of health. 
 The reason why --,despite all the efforts to cut it down,,to constrain it, to hold it back --,why these open models will still start emerging,with tremendous force,,is that they multiply our productive resources.,And one of the reasons they do that,is that they turn users into producers,,consumers into designers. 
 Thank you very much.We've been told to go out on a limbnand say something surprising.,So I'll try and do that,,but I want to start with two thingsnthat everyone already knows.,And the first one, in fact,nis something that has been known,for most of recorded history,,and that is, that the planet Earth,nor the solar system,,or our environment or whatever,,is uniquely suitednto sustain our evolution --,or creation, as it used to be thought --,and our present existence,nand most important, our future survival. 
 Nowadays, this ideanhas a dramatic name: Spaceship Earth.,And the idea therenis that outside the spaceship,,the universe is implacably hostile,,and inside is all we have,nall we depend on,,and we only get the one chance:nif we mess up our spaceship,,we've got nowhere else to go.,Now, the second thingnthat everyone already knows,is that, contrary to what was believednfor most of human history,,human beings are not, in fact,nthe hub of existence.,As Stephen Hawking famously said,,we're just a chemical scumnon the surface of a typical planet,that's in orbit around a typical star,,which is on the outskirtsnof a typical galaxy, and so on. 
 Now, the first of those two thingsnthat everyone knows is kind of saying,that we're at a very un-typical place,nuniquely suited and so on,,and the second one is sayingnthat we're at a typical place.,And, especially if you regardnthese two as deep truths to live by,and to inform your life decisions,,then they seem a little bitnto conflict with each other.,But that doesn't prevent themnfrom both being completely false. 
 (Laughter) 
 And they are.,So let me start with the second one:,"Typical." Well, is this a typical place?,Well, let's look around, you know,nlook in a random direction,,and we see a wall, and chemical scum -- 
 (Laughter) 
 and that's not typicalnof the universe at all.,All you've got to do is gona few hundred miles in that same direction,and look back,,and you won't see any wallsnor chemical scum at all --,all you see is a blue planet.,And if you go further than that,,you'll see the Sun, the solar systemnand the stars and so on,,but that's still not typicalnof the universe,,because stars come in galaxies.,And most places in the universe,na typical place in the universe,,is nowhere near any galaxies. 
 So let's go out further, till we'renoutside the galaxy, and look back,,and yeah, there's the huge galaxynwith spiral arms laid out in front of us.,And at this point, we've comen100,000 light-years from here.,But we're still nowhere nearna typical place in the universe.,To get to a typical place,,you've got to gon1,000 times as far as that,,into intergalactic space.,And so, what does thatnlook like -- "typical?",What does a "typical" placenin the universe look like?,Well, at enormous expense,nTED has arranged,a high-resolution immersionnvirtual reality rendering,of the view from intergalactic space.,Can we have the lights off,nplease, so we can see it? 
 Well, not quite, not quite perfect. 
 You see, intergalactic spacenis completely dark, pitch dark.,It's so dark,,that if you were to be lookingnat the nearest star to you,,and that star were to explodenas a supernova,,and you were to be staring directly at itnat the moment when its light reached you,,you still wouldn't be ablento see even a glimmer.,That's how big and how darknthe universe is.,And that's despite the factnthat a supernova is so bright,,so brilliant an event,,that it would kill you stone deadnat a range of several light-years. 
 (Laughter) 
 And yet, from intergalactic space,,it's so far away you wouldn't even see it.,It's also very cold out there --,less than three degreesnabove absolute zero.,And it's very empty.,The vacuum there is one million timesnless dense than the highest vacuum,that our best technology on Earthncan currently create.,So that's how differentna typical place is from this place.,And that is how un-typical this place is.,So can we have the lightsnback on please? Thank you. 
 Now, how do we know about an environmentnthat's so far away and so different,and so alien from anything we're used to?,Well, the Earth -- our environment,nin the form of us --,is creating knowledge.,Well, what does that mean?,Well, look out even furthernthan we've just been --,I mean from here, with a telescope --,and you'll see things that looknlike stars, they're called quasars.,"Quasars" originally meantn"quasi-stellar object,",which means "things that lookna bit like stars." 
 (Laughter) 
 But they're not stars.,And we know what they are.,Billions of years agonand billions of light-years away,,the material at the centernof a galaxy collapsed,towards a super-massive black hole.,And then intense magnetic fields,directed some of the energynof that gravitational collapse,and some of the matter,back out in the form of tremendous jets,,which illuminated lobes,with the brilliance of --nI think it's a trillion -- suns. 
 Now, the physics of the human brainncould hardly be more unlike,the physics of such a jet.,We couldn't survive for an instant in it.,Language breaks downnwhen trying to describe,what it would be likenin one of those jets.,It would be a bit like experiencingna supernova explosion,,but at point-blank rangenand for millions of years at a time. 
 (Laughter) 
 And yet, that jet happenednin precisely such a way,that billions of years later,non the other side of the universe,,some bit of chemical scumncould accurately describe,and model and predictnand explain, above all --,there's your reference --,what was happening there, in reality.,The one physical system, the brain,ncontains an accurate working model,of the other, the quasar.,Not just a superficial image of it,nthough it contains that as well,,but an explanatory model,,embodying the samenmathematical relationships,and the same causal structure. 
 Now, that is knowledge.,And if that weren't amazing enough,,the faithfulness with whichnthe one structure resembles the other,is increasing with time.,That is the growth of knowledge.,So, the laws of physicsnhave this special property,,that physical objects as unlike each othernas they could possibly be,,can nevertheless embody the samenmathematical and causal structure,and to do it more and more so over time. 
 So we are a chemical scumnthat is different.,This chemical scum has universality.,Its structure contains,nwith ever-increasing precision,,the structure of everything.,This place, and not other placesnin the universe,,is a hub which contains within itselfnthe structural and causal essence,of the whole of the restnof physical reality.,And so, far from being insignificant,,the fact that the lawsnof physics allow this,or even mandate that this can happen,,is one of the most important thingsnabout the physical world. 
 Now how does the solar system --nour environment, in the form of us --,acquire this special relationshipnwith the rest of the universe?,Well, one thing that's truenabout Stephen Hawking's remark --,I mean, it is true,nbut it's the wrong emphasis.,One thing that's true about it is thatnit doesn't do it with any special physics,,there's no special dispensation,nno miracles involved.,It does it simply with three thingsnthat we have here in abundance.,One of them is matter,,because the growth of knowledgenis a form of information processing.,Information processing is computation,ncomputation requires a computer --,there's no known way of makingna computer without matter.,We also need energy to makenthe computer, and most important,,to make the media, in effect,nonto which we record,the knowledge that we discover. 
 And then thirdly,nless tangible but just as essential,for the open-ended creationnof knowledge, of explanations,,is evidence.,Now, our environmentnis inundated with evidence.,We happen to get round to testing,nlet's say, Newton's Law of Gravity,,about 300 years ago.,But the evidence that we used to do that,was falling down on everynsquare meter of the Earth,for billions of years before that,,and will continue to fallnfor billions of years afterwards.,And the same is truenfor all the other sciences.,As far as we know, evidence to discovernthe most fundamental truths,of all the sciences is here justnfor the taking, on our planet. 
 Our location is saturated with evidence,and also with matter and energy.,Out in intergalactic space,,those three prerequisitesnfor the open-ended creation of knowledge,are at their lowest possible supply --,as I said, it's empty, it's coldnand it's dark out there.,Or is it?,Now actually, that's justnanother parochial misconception. 
 (Laughter) 
 Because imagine a cube out therenin intergalactic space,,the same size as our home,nthe solar system.,Now that cube is very emptynby human standards,,but that still means that it containsnover a million tons of matter.,And a million tons is enough to make,nsay, a self-contained space station,,on which there's a colony of scientists,that are devoted to creating an open-endednstream of knowledge, and so on. 
 Now, it's way beyond present technology,to even gather the hydrogennfrom intergalactic space,and form it into other elements and so on.,But the thing is,nin a comprehensible universe,,if something isn't forbiddennby the laws of physics,,then what could possibly prevent usnfrom doing it, other than knowing how?,In other words, it's a matternof knowledge, not resources.,If we could do that, we'd automaticallynhave an energy supply,,because this transmutationnwould be a fusion reactor. 
 And evidence?,Well, again, it's dark out therento human senses,,but all you've got to donis take a telescope,,even one of present-day design,,look out, and you'll seenthe same galaxies as we do from here.,And with a more powerful telescope,,you'll be able to see starsnand planets in those galaxies,,you'll be able to do astrophysicsnand learn the laws of physics.,And locally there you could buildnparticle accelerators,,and learn elementary particle physicsnand chemistry, and so on.,Probably the hardest science to donwould be biology field trips -- 
 (Laughter) 
 because it would takenseveral hundred million years,to get to the nearestnlife-bearing planet and back.,But I have to tell you --nand sorry, Richard --,but I never did like biologynfield trips much, 
 (Laughter) 
 and I think we can just about make do,with one every few hundred million years. 
 (Laughter) 
 So in fact, intergalactic spacendoes contain all the prerequisites,for the open-ended creation of knowledge.,Any such cube anywhere in the universe,could become the same kindnof hub that we are,,if the knowledge of how to do sonwere present there.,So, we're not in a uniquelynhospitable place.,If intergalactic spacenis capable of creating,an open-ended stream of explanations,,then so is almost every other environment,,so is the Earth.,So is a polluted Earth.,And the limiting factor, there and here,,is not resources,nbecause they're plentiful,,but knowledge, which is scarce. 
 Now this cosmic knowledge-based viewnmay -- and I think ought to --,make us feel very special.,But it should alsonmake us feel vulnerable,,because it means thatnwithout the specific knowledge,that's needed to surviventhe ongoing challenges of the universe,,we won't survive them.,All it takes is for a supernovanto go off a few light-years away,,and we'll all be dead! 
 Martin Rees has recently written a book,about our vulnerabilitynto all sorts of things,,from astrophysics, to scientificnexperiments gone wrong,,and most importantly, to terrorismnwith weapons of mass destruction.,And he thinks that civilizationnhas only a 50 percent chance,of surviving this century.,I think he's going to talknabout that later in the conference. 
 Now, I don't think that probabilitynis the right category,to discuss this issue in,,but I do agree with him about this:,We can survive and we can fail to survive.,But it depends not on chance,,but on whether we createnthe relevant knowledge in time.,The danger is not at all unprecedented.,Species go extinct all the time.,Civilizations end.,The overwhelming majoritynof all species and all civilizations,that have ever existed are now history.,And if we want to benthe exception to that,,then logically, our only hopenis to make use of the one feature,that distinguishes our speciesnand civilization from all the others --,namely, our special relationshipnwith the laws of physics,,our ability to creatennew explanations, new knowledge --,to be a hub of existence. 
 So let me now apply thisnto a current controversy,,not because I want to advocatenany particular solution,,but just to illustratenthe kind of thing I mean.,And the controversy is global warming.,Now, I'm a physicist,nbut I'm not the right kind of physicist.,In regard to global warming,nI'm just a layman.,And the rational thing for a layman to do,is to take seriouslynthe prevailing scientific theory.,And according to that theory,nit's already too late to avoid a disaster,,because if it's true that our best optionnat the moment is to prevent CO2 emissions,with something like the Kyoto Protocol,,with its constraints on economic activitynand its enormous cost,of hundreds of billions of dollars,nor whatever it is,,then that is already a disasternby any reasonable measure.,And the actions that are advocated are notneven purported to solve the problem,,merely to postpone it by a little.,So it's already too late to avoid it,,and it probably has beenntoo late to avoid it,ever since before anyonenrealized the danger.,It was probably alreadyntoo late in the 1970s,,when the best availablenscientific theory was telling us,that industrial emissions werenabout to precipitate a new ice age,,in which billions would die. 
 Now, the lesson of that seems clear to me,,and I don't know why it isn'tninforming public debate.,It is that we can't always know.,When we know of an impending disaster,,and how to solve it at a cost lessnthan the cost of the disaster itself,,then there's not going to benmuch argument, really.,But no precautionsnand no precautionary principle,can avoid problemsnthat we do not yet foresee. 
 Hence, we need a stance of problem-fixing,,not just problem-avoidance.,And it's true that an ounce of preventionnequals a pound of cure,,but that's only if we knownwhat to prevent.,If you've been punched on the nose,,then the science of medicinendoes not consist of teaching you,how to avoid punches. 
 (Laughter) 
 If medical science stopped seeking curesnand concentrated on prevention only,,then it would achievenvery little of either. 
 The world is buzzing at the moment,with plans to force reductionsnin gas emissions at all costs.,It ought to be buzzing with plansnto reduce the temperature,,and with plans to livenat the higher temperature --,and not at all costs,nbut efficiently and cheaply.,And some such plans exist,,things like swarms of mirrors in spacento deflect the sunlight away,,and encouraging aquatic organismsnto eat more carbon dioxide.,At the moment, these thingsnare fringe research;,they're not central to the human effortnto face this problem,,or problems in general.,And with problemsnthat we are not aware of yet,,the ability to put right -- not the sheerngood luck of avoiding indefinitely --,is our only hope, not justnof solving problems,,but of survival. 
 So take two stone tablets,nand carve on them.,On one of them, carve:n"Problems are soluble.",And on the other one, carve:n"Problems are inevitable." 
 Thank you. 
 (Applause)Charles Van Doren, who was laterna senior editor of Britannica,,said the ideal encyclopedianshould be radical --,it should stop being safe.,But if you know anything about the historynof Britannica since 1962,,it was anything but radical:,still a very completely safe,nstodgy type of encyclopedia.,Wikipedia, on the other hand,nbegins with a very radical idea,,and that's for all of usnto imagine a world,in which every single person on the planet,is given free accessnto the sum of all human knowledge. 
 And that's what we're doing.,So Wikipedia --,you just saw the littlendemonstration of it --,it's a freely licensed encyclopedia.,It's written by thousands of volunteers,all over the worldnin many, many languages.,It's written using wiki software --,which is the type of softwarenhe just demonstrated --,so anyone can quickly edit and save,,and it goes livenon the Internet immediately.,And everything about Wikipedia is managednby virtually an all-volunteer staff.,So when Yochai is talkingnabout new methods of organization,,he's exactly describing Wikipedia.,And what I'm going to do today,is tell you a little bit morenabout how it really works on the inside. 
 So Wikipedia's ownednby the Wikimedia Foundation,,which I founded,,a nonprofit organization.,And our goal, the core aimnof the Wikimedia Foundation,,is to get a free encyclopedianto every single person on the planet.,And so, if you thinknabout what that means,,it means a lot morenthan just building a cool website.,We're really interestednin all the issues of the digital divide,,poverty worldwide,,empowering people everywherento have the information that they need,to make good decisions.,And so we're goingnto have to do a lot of work,that goes beyond just the Internet.,And so that's a big part of whynwe've chosen the free licensing model,,because that empowers localnentrepreneurs or anyone who wants to --,they can take our contentnand do anything they like with it --,you can copy it, redistribute it --,and you can do itncommercially or non-commercially. 
 So there's a lot of opportunitiesnthat are going to arise around Wikipedia,all over the world.,We're funded by donations from the public,,and one of the moreninteresting things about that,is how little moneynit actually takes to run Wikipedia.,So Yochai showed you the graphnof what the cost of a printing press was.,And I'm going to tell younwhat the cost of Wikipedia is.,But first, I'll show you how big it is.,So we've got over 600,000narticles in English.,We've got two million total articlesnacross many, many different languages.,The biggest languagesnare German, Japanese, French --,all the Western-Europeannlanguages are quite big.,But only around one-thirdnof all of our traffic to our web,clusters to the English Wikipedia,,which is surprising to a lot of people.,A lot of people think in a verynEnglish-centric way on the Internet,,but for us, we're truly global.,We're in many, many languages.,How popular we've gotten to be --nwe're a top-50 website,and we're more popularnthan the New York Times.,So this is where we getnto Yochai's discussion. 
 This shows the growth of Wikipedia --nwe're the blue line there --,and this is the New York Times over there.,And what's interesting about this,is the New York Times website is a huge,nenormous corporate operation,with I have no ideanhow many hundreds of employees.,We have exactly one employee,,and that employeenis our lead software developer.,And he's only been our employeensince January 2005,,all the other growth before that ...,So the servers are managednby a ragtag band of volunteers.,All the editing is done by volunteers.,And the way that we're organized,is not like any traditionalnorganization you can imagine.,People are always asking,n"Well, who's in charge of this?",or "Who does that?",And the answer is:nanybody who wants to pitch in.,It's a very unusual and chaotic thing.,We've got over 90 servers nownin three locations.,These are managed by volunteernsystem administrators who are online.,I can go onlinenany time of the day or night,and see eight to 10 people waiting for me,to ask a question or something,nanything about the servers.,You could never affordnto do this in a company.,You could never afford,to have a standby crew of peoplen24 hours a day,and do what we're doing at Wikipedia. 
 So we're doing aroundn1.4 billion page views monthly,,so it's really gotten to be a huge thing.,And everything is managednby the volunteers.,And the total monthly costnfor our bandwidth is about 5,000 dollars.,And that's essentially our main cost.,We could actually do without the employee.,We hired Brian because he wasnworking part-time for two years,and full-time at Wikipedia,,so we actually hired him,,so he could get a lifenand go to the movies sometimes.,So the big question when you've gotnthis really chaotic organization is,,why isn't it all rubbish?,Why is the website as good as it is? 
 First of all, how good is it?,Well, it's pretty good.,It isn't perfect,,but it's much betternthan you would expect,,given our completely chaotic model.,So when you saw him makena ridiculous edit to the page about me,,you think, "Oh, this is obviouslynjust going to degenerate into rubbish.",But when we've seen quality tests --,and there haven't been enough of these yet,and I'm really encouragingnpeople to do more,,comparing Wikipedianto traditional things --,we win hands down. 
 So a German magazinencompared German Wikipedia,,which is much, much smaller than English,,to Microsoft Encartanand to Brockhaus multimedial,,and we won across the board.,They hired experts to come and looknat articles and compare the quality,,and we were very pleased with that result. 
 So a lot of people have heard aboutnthe Wikipedia Bush-Kerry controversy.,The media has covered thisnsomewhat extensively.,It started outnwith an article in Red Herring.,The reporters called me up and they --,I mean, I have to saynthey spelled my name right,,but they really wanted to saynthe Bush-Kerry election is so contentious,,it's tearing apartnthe Wikipedia community.,And so they quote me as saying,,"They're the most contentiousnin the history of Wikipedia.",What I actually saidnis they're not contentious at all.,So it's a slight misquote. 
 (Laughter) 
 The articles were edited quite heavily.,And it is true that we didnhave to lock the articles,on a couple of occasions.,Time magazine recently reported that,"Extreme action sometimes has to be taken,,and Wales locked the entriesnon Kerry and Bush for most of 2004.",This came after I told the reporternthat we had to lock it for --,occasionally a little bit here and there.,So the truth in generalnis that the kinds of controversies,that you would probably thinknwe have within the Wikipedia community,are not really controversies at all. 
 Articles on controversial topicsnare edited a lot,,but they don't cause much controversynwithin the community.,And the reason for this is that mostnpeople understand the need for neutrality.,The real struggle is notnbetween the right and the left --,that's where most people assume --,but it's betweennthe party of the thoughtful,and the party of the jerks.,And no side of the political spectrum,has a monopolynon either of those qualities.,The actual truthnabout the specific Bush-Kerry incident,is that the Bush-Kerry articles,were locked less than one percentnof the time in 2004,,and it wasn't becausenthey were contentious;,it was just becausenthere was routine vandalism --,which happens sometimes even on stage ... 
 (Laughter) 
 Sometimes even reporters have reportednto me that they vandalized Wikipedia,and were amazednthat it was fixed so quickly.,And I said -- you know, I always say,nplease don't do that.,That's not a good thing.,So how do we do this?,How do we manage the quality control?,How does it work? 
 So there's a few elements,,mostly social policiesnand some elements of the software.,So the biggestnand the most important thing,is our neutral point of view policy.,This is somethingnthat I set down, from the very beginning,,as a core principle of the communitynthat's completely not debatable.,It's a social concept of cooperation,,so we don't talk a lotnabout truth and objectivity.,The reason for this is if we say,we're only going to writenthe "truth" about some topic,,that doesn't do us a damn bit of goodnof figuring out what to write,,because I don't agree with younabout what's the truth.,But we have thisnjargon term of neutrality,,which has its own long historynwithin the community,,which basically says,nany time there's a controversial issue,,Wikipedia itself should notntake a stand on the issue.,We should merely report on whatnreputable parties have said about it.,So this neutrality policynis really important for us,because it empowers a communitynthat is very diverse,to come togethernand actually get some work done. 
 So we have very diverse contributors,in terms of political,nreligious, cultural backgrounds.,By having this firm neutrality policy,,which is non-negotiablenfrom the beginning,,we ensure that people can work together,and that the entriesndon't become simply a war,back and forthnbetween the left and the right.,If you engage in that type of behavior,nyou'll be asked to leave the community. 
 So, real-time peer review.,Every single change on the sitengoes to the "Recent changes" page.,So as soon as he made his change,nit went to the "Recent changes" page.,That recent changes pagenwas also fed into an IRC channel,,which is an Internet chat channel,that people are monitoringnwith various software tools.,And people can get RSS feeds --,they can get emailnnotifications of changes.,And then users can set upntheir own personal watch list.,So my page is on quite a fewnvolunteers' watch lists,,because it is sometimes vandalized.,And therefore, what happens is someonenwill notice the change very quickly,,and then they'll justnsimply revert the change. 
 There's a "new pages feed," for example,,so you can gonto a certain page of Wikipedia,and see every new page as it's created.,This is really important,because a lot of new pagesnare just garbage that has to be deleted,,you know, "ASDFASDF.",But also, that's somenof the most interesting and fun things,,some of the new articles.,People will start an articlenon some interesting topic,,other people will find that intriguing,and jump in and helpnand make it much better. 
 So we do have edits by anonymous users,,which is one of the most controversialnand intriguing things about Wikipedia.,So, Chris was able to do his change --nhe didn't have to log in or anything;,he just went on the websitenand made a change.,But it turns outnthat only about 18 percent,of all the edits to the website,are done by anonymous users.,And that's a really importantnthing to understand:,the vast majority of the editsnthat go on on the website,are from a very close-knit communitynof maybe 600 to 1,000 people,who are in constant communication.,And we have over 40 IRC channels,n40 mailing lists.,All these people know each other.,They communicate.nWe have off-line meetings. 
 These are the peoplenwho are doing the bulk of the site,,and they are, in a sense,nsemi-professionals at what they're doing.,The standards we set for ourselves,are equal to or highernthan professional standards of quality.,We don't always meet those standards,nbut that's what we're striving for. 
 And so that tight communitynis who really cares for the site,,and these are somenof the smartest people I've ever met.,It's my job to say that,nbut it's actually true.,The type of people who were drawnnto writing an encyclopedia for fun,tend to be pretty smart people. 
 The tools and the software:nthere's lots of tools that allow us --,allow us, meaning the community --,to self-monitornand to monitor all the work.,This is an examplenof a page history on "flat Earth,",and you can see some changesnthat were made.,What's nice about this pagenis you can immediately take a look at this,and see, "OK, I understand now.",When somebody goes and looks at --,they see that someone,nan anonymous IP number,,made an edit to my page.,That sounds suspicious.nWho is this person?,Somebody looks at it --,they can immediately seenhighlighted in red,all of the changes that took place --,to see, OK, well, these wordsnhave changed, things like this.,So that's one tool that we can use,to very quickly monitornthe history of a page. 
 Another thing that we donwithin the community,is we leave everything very open-ended.,Most of the social rulesnand the methods of work,are left completely open-endednin the software.,All of that stuff is just on Wiki pages.,And so there's nothingnin the software that enforces the rules.,The example I've got up herenis the Votes for Deletion page.,So, I mentioned earlier,npeople type "ASDFASDF" --,it needs to be deleted.,Cases like that,nthe administrators just delete it.,There's no reasonnto have a big argument about it.,But you can imagine there's a lotnof other areas where the question is,,is this notable enoughnto go in an encyclopedia?,Is the information verifiable?nIs it a hoax? Is it true? Is it what?,So we needed a social methodnfor figuring out the answer to this.,And so the method that arosenorganically within the community,is the Votes For Deletion page.,And in the particularnexample we have here,,it's a film, "Twisted Issues,",and the first person says,,"Now this is supposedly a film.nIt fails the Google test miserably.",The Google test is you look in Googlenand see if it's there,,because if something's not even in Google,nit probably doesn't exist at all.,It's not a perfect rule,,but it's a nice starting pointnfor quick research.,So somebody says, "Delete it, please.nDelete it -- it's not notable.",And then somebody says,n"Wait, I found it. I found it in a book,,'Film Threat Video Guide:nthe 20 Underground Films You Must See.'",So the next persons says, "Clean it up.",Somebody says, "I've found it on IMDB.nKeep, keep, keep." 
 And what's interesting about thisnis that the software is --,these votes are just textntyped into a page.,This is not really a votenso much as it is a dialogue.,Now it is true that at the end of the day,,an administrator can go through herenand take a look at this and say,,"OK, 18 deletes, two keeps:nwe'll delete it.",But in other cases,nthis could be 18 deletes and two keeps,,and we would keep it,nbecause if those last two keeps say,,"Wait a minute. Nobody else saw thisnbut I found it in a book,,and I found a linknto a page that describes it,,and I'm going to clean it up tomorrow,nso please don't delete it,",then it would survive. 
 And it also mattersnwho the people are who are voting.,Like I say, it's a tight-knit community.,Down here at the bottom,n"Keep, real movie," RickK.,RickK is a very famous Wikipediannwho does an enormous amount of work,with vandalism, hoaxesnand votes for deletion.,His voice carries a lot of weightnwithin the community,because he knows what he's doing.,So how is all this governed?,People really want to knownabout administrators, things like that.,So the Wikipedia governance model,nthe governance of the community,,is a very confusing,nbut workable mix of consensus --,meaning we try not to votenon the content of articles,,because the majority viewnis not necessarily neutral --,some amount of democracy --,all of the administrators --,these are the peoplenwho have the ability to delete pages.,That doesn't mean that they haventhe right to delete pages.,They still have to follow all the rules --nbut they're elected by the community. 
 Sometimes people --nrandom trolls on the Internet --,like to accuse menof handpicking the administrators,to bias the content of the encyclopedia.,I always laugh at this, because I havenno idea how they're elected, actually.,There's a certain amount of aristocracy.,You got a hint of thatnwhen I mentioned, like,,RickK's voice would carryna lot more weight,than someone we don't know. 
 I give this talk sometimes with Angela,,who was just re-elected to the boardnfrom the community --,to the Board of the Foundation,,with more than twice the votesnof the person who didn't make it.,And I always embarrass her because I say,,"Well, Angela, for example,,could get away with doingnabsolutely anything within Wikipedia,,because she's so admired and so powerful.",But the irony is, of course, that Angelancan do this because she's the one person,who you know would never, evernbreak any rules of Wikipedia.,And I also like to saynshe's the only person,who actually knowsnall the rules of Wikipedia, so ...,And then there's monarchy,,and that's my rolenon the community, so ... 
 (Laughter) 
 I was describing this in Berlin once,,and the next daynin the newspaper the headline said,,"I am the Queen of England." 
 (Laughter) 
 And that's not exactly what I said, but -- 
 (Laughter) 
 the point is my role in the community --,Within the free software world,nthere's been a long-standing tradition,of the "benevolent dictator" model.,So if you look at mostnof the major free software projects,,they have one single person in charge,who everyone agreesnis the benevolent dictator.,Well, I don't like the termn"benevolent dictator,",and I don't think that it's my jobnor my role in the world of ideas,to be the dictator of the futurenof all human knowledge,compiled by the world.,It just isn't appropriate.,But there is a need stillnfor a certain amount of monarchy,,a certain amount of --,sometimes we have to make a decision,and we don't wantnto get bogged down too heavily,in formal decision-making processes. 
 So as an examplenof how this can be important:,we recently had a situation wherena neo-Nazi website discovered Wikipedia,,and they said,n"Oh, well, this is horrible,,this Jewish conspiracy of a website,,and we're going to get certain articlesndeleted that we don't like.,And we see they have a voting process,nso we're going to send --,we have 40,000 membersnand we're going to send them over,and they're all going to votenand get these pages deleted.",Well, they managednto get 18 people to show up.,That's neo-Nazi math for you.,They always think they've gotn40,000 members when they've got 18.,But they managed to get 18 peoplento come and vote in a fairly absurd way,to delete a perfectly valid article.,Of course, the vote ended upnbeing about 85 to 18,,so there was no real dangernto our democratic processes.,On the other hand, people said,n"But what are we going to do?,I mean, this could happen.,What if some groupngets really seriously organized,and comes in and wants to vote?",Then I said, "Well, fuck it,nwe'll just change the rules.",That's my job in the community:,to say we won't allownour openness and freedom,to undermine the quality of the content.,And so, as long as peoplentrust me in my role,,then that's a valid place for me.,Of course, because of the free licensing,,if I do a bad job, the volunteersnare more than happy to take and leave --,I can't tell anyone what to do. 
 So the final point herenis that to understand how Wikipedia works,,it's important to understandnthat our wiki model is the way we work,,but we are not fanatical web anarchists.,In fact, we're very flexiblenabout the social methodology,,because ultimately,nthe passion of the community,is for the quality of the work,,not necessarily for the processnthat we use to generate it. 
 Thank you. 
 (Applause) 
 Ben Saunders: Yeah, hi, Ben Saunders.,Jimmy, you mentioned impartialitynbeing a key to Wikipedia's success.,It strikes me that much of the textbooksnthat are used to educate our children,are inherently biased.,Have you found Wikipedianbeing used by teachers,and how do you see Wikipedianchanging education? 
 Jimmy Wales: Yeah, so, a lot of teachersnare beginning to use Wikipedia.,There's a media storyline about Wikipedia,nwhich I think is false.,It builds on the storylinenof bloggers versus newspapers.,And the storyline is,nthere's this crazy thing, Wikipedia,,but academics hate itnand teachers hate it.,And that turns out to not be true.,The last time I got an emailnfrom a journalist saying,,"Why do academics hate Wikipedia?",I sent it from my Harvard email address,because I was recentlynappointed a fellow there.,And I said, "Well,nthey don't all hate it." 
 (Laughter) 
 But I think there's goingnto be huge impacts.,And we actually have a projectnthat I'm personally really excited about,,which is the Wikibooks project,,which is an effort to createntextbooks in all the languages.,And that's a much bigger project.,It's going to take 20 years or sonto come to fruition. 
 But part of that is to fulfill our mission,of giving an encyclopedianto every single person on the planet.,We don't mean we're goingnto Spam them with AOL-style CDs.,We mean we're going to give themna tool that they can use.,And for a lot of people in the world,,if I give you an encyclopedianthat's written at a university level,,it doesn't do you any goodnwithout a whole host of literacy materials,to build you up to the pointnwhere you can actually use it.,The Wikibooks projectnis an effort to do that.,And I think that we're going to see --nit may not even come from us;,there's all kinds of innovation going on.,But freely licensed textbooksnare the next big thing in education.If you take 10,000 people at random, 9,999 have something in common:,their interests in business lie on or near the Earth's surface.,The odd one out is an astronomer, and I am one of that strange breed.,(Laughter),My talk will be in two parts. I'll talk first as an astronomer,,and then as a worried member of the human race.,But let's start off by remembering that Darwin showed,how we're the outcome of four billion years of evolution.,And what we try to do in astronomy and cosmology,is to go back before Darwin's simple beginning,,to set our Earth in a cosmic context. 
 And let me just run through a few slides.,This was the impact that happened last week on a comet.,If they'd sent a nuke, it would have been rather more spectacular,than what actually happened last Monday.,So that's another project for NASA.,That's Mars from the European Mars Express, and at New Year.,This artist's impression turned into reality,when a parachute landed on Titan, Saturn's giant moon.,It landed on the surface. This is pictures taken on the way down.,That looks like a coastline.,It is indeed, but the ocean is liquid methane --,the temperature minus 170 degrees centigrade.,If we go beyond our solar system,,we've learned that the stars aren't twinkly points of light.,Each one is like a sun with a retinue of planets orbiting around it.,And we can see places where stars are forming,,like the Eagle Nebula. We see stars dying.,In six billion years, the sun will look like that.,And some stars die spectacularly in a supernova explosion,,leaving remnants like that. 
 On a still bigger scale, we see entire galaxies of stars.,We see entire ecosystems where gas is being recycled.,And to the cosmologist,,these galaxies are just the atoms, as it were, of the large-scale universe.,This picture shows a patch of sky,so small that it would take about 100 patches like it,to cover the full moon in the sky.,Through a small telescope, this would look quite blank,,but you see here hundreds of little, faint smudges.,Each is a galaxy, fully like ours or Andromeda,,which looks so small and faint because its light,has taken 10 billion light-years to get to us.,The stars in those galaxies probably don't have planets around them.,There's scant chance of life there -- that's because there's been no time,for the nuclear fusion in stars to make silicon and carbon and iron,,the building blocks of planets and of life.,We believe that all of this emerged from a Big Bang --,a hot, dense state. So how did that amorphous Big Bang,turn into our complex cosmos? 
 I'm going to show you a movie simulation,16 powers of 10 faster than real time,,which shows a patch of the universe where the expansions have subtracted out.,But you see, as time goes on in gigayears at the bottom,,you will see structures evolve as gravity feeds,on small, dense irregularities, and structures develop.,And we'll end up after 13 billion years,with something looking rather like our own universe.,And we compare simulated universes like that --,I'll show you a better simulation at the end of my talk --,with what we actually see in the sky.,Well, we can trace things back to the earlier stages of the Big Bang,,but we still don't know what banged and why it banged. 
 That's a challenge for 21st-century science.,If my research group had a logo, it would be this picture here:,an ouroboros, where you see the micro-world on the left --,the world of the quantum -- and on the right,the large-scale universe of planets, stars and galaxies.,We know our universes are united though --,links between left and right.,The everyday world is determined by atoms,,how they stick together to make molecules.,Stars are fueled by how the nuclei in those atoms react together.,And, as we've learned in the last few years, galaxies are held together,by the gravitational pull of so-called dark matter:,particles in huge swarms, far smaller even than atomic nuclei.,But we'd like to know the synthesis symbolized at the very top.,The micro-world of the quantum is understood.,On the right hand side, gravity holds sway. Einstein explained that.,But the unfinished business for 21st-century science,is to link together cosmos and micro-world,with a unified theory -- symbolized, as it were, gastronomically,at the top of that picture. (Laughter),And until we have that synthesis,,we won't be able to understand the very beginning of our universe,because when our universe was itself the size of an atom,,quantum effects could shake everything. 
 And so we need a theory that unifies the very large and the very small,,which we don't yet have.,One idea, incidentally --,and I had this hazard sign to say I'm going to speculate from now on --,is that our Big Bang was not the only one.,One idea is that our three-dimensional universe,may be embedded in a high-dimensional space,,just as you can imagine on these sheets of paper.,You can imagine ants on one of them,thinking it's a two-dimensional universe,,not being aware of another population of ants on the other.,So there could be another universe just a millimeter away from ours,,but we're not aware of it because that millimeter,is measured in some fourth spatial dimension,,and we're imprisoned in our three.,And so we believe that there may be a lot more to physical reality,than what we've normally called our universe --,the aftermath of our Big Bang. And here's another picture.,Bottom right depicts our universe,,which on the horizon is not beyond that,,but even that is just one bubble, as it were, in some vaster reality.,Many people suspect that just as we've gone from believing,in one solar system to zillions of solar systems,,one galaxy to many galaxies,,we have to go to many Big Bangs from one Big Bang,,perhaps these many Big Bangs displaying,an immense variety of properties. 
 Well, let's go back to this picture.,There's one challenge symbolized at the top,,but there's another challenge to science symbolized at the bottom.,You want to not only synthesize the very large and the very small,,but we want to understand the very complex.,And the most complex things are ourselves,,midway between atoms and stars.,We depend on stars to make the atoms we're made of.,We depend on chemistry to determine our complex structure.,We clearly have to be large, compared to atoms,,to have layer upon layer of complex structure.,We clearly have to be small, compared to stars and planets --,otherwise we'd be crushed by gravity. And in fact, we are midway.,It would take as many human bodies to make up the sun,as there are atoms in each of us.,The geometric mean of the mass of a proton,and the mass of the sun is 50 kilograms,,within a factor of two of the mass of each person here.,Well, most of you anyway.,The science of complexity is probably the greatest challenge of all,,greater than that of the very small on the left,and the very large on the right.,And it's this science,,which is not only enlightening our understanding of the biological world,,but also transforming our world faster than ever.,And more than that, it's engendering new kinds of change. 
 And I now move on to the second part of my talk,,and the book "Our Final Century" was mentioned.,If I was not a self-effacing Brit, I would mention the book myself,,and I would add that it's available in paperback. 
 (Laughter) 
 And in America it was called "Our Final Hour",because Americans like instant gratification. 
 (Laughter) 
 But my theme is that in this century,,not only has science changed the world faster than ever,,but in new and different ways.,Targeted drugs, genetic modification, artificial intelligence,,perhaps even implants into our brains,,may change human beings themselves. And human beings,,their physique and character, has not changed for thousands of years.,It may change this century.,It's new in our history.,And the human impact on the global environment -- greenhouse warming,,mass extinctions and so forth -- is unprecedented, too.,And so, this makes this coming century a challenge.,Bio- and cybertechnologies are environmentally benign,in that they offer marvelous prospects,,while, nonetheless, reducing pressure on energy and resources.,But they will have a dark side.,In our interconnected world, novel technology could empower,just one fanatic,,or some weirdo with a mindset of those who now design computer viruses,,to trigger some kind on disaster.,Indeed, catastrophe could arise simply from technical misadventure --,error rather than terror.,And even a tiny probability of catastrophe is unacceptable,when the downside could be of global consequence. 
 In fact, some years ago, Bill Joy wrote an article,expressing tremendous concern about robots taking us over, etc.,I don't go along with all that,,but it's interesting that he had a simple solution.,It was what he called "fine-grained relinquishment.",He wanted to give up the dangerous kind of science,and keep the good bits. Now, that's absurdly naive for two reasons.,First, any scientific discovery has benign consequences,as well as dangerous ones.,And also, when a scientist makes a discovery,,he or she normally has no clue what the applications are going to be.,And so what this means is that we have to accept the risks,if we are going to enjoy the benefits of science.,We have to accept that there will be hazards.,And I think we have to go back to what happened in the post-War era,,post-World War II, when the nuclear scientists,who'd been involved in making the atomic bomb,,in many cases were concerned that they should do all they could,to alert the world to the dangers. 
 And they were inspired not by the young Einstein,,who did the great work in relativity, but by the old Einstein,,the icon of poster and t-shirt,,who failed in his scientific efforts to unify the physical laws.,He was premature. But he was a moral compass --,an inspiration to scientists who were concerned with arms control.,And perhaps the greatest living person,is someone I'm privileged to know, Joe Rothblatt.,Equally untidy office there, as you can see.,He's 96 years old, and he founded the Pugwash movement.,He persuaded Einstein, as his last act,,to sign the famous memorandum of Bertrand Russell.,And he sets an example of the concerned scientist.,And I think to harness science optimally,,to choose which doors to open and which to leave closed,,we need latter-day counterparts of people like Joseph Rothblatt. 
 We need not just campaigning physicists,,but we need biologists, computer experts,and environmentalists as well.,And I think academics and independent entrepreneurs,have a special obligation because they have more freedom,than those in government service,,or company employees subject to commercial pressure.,I wrote my book, "Our Final Century," as a scientist,,just a general scientist. But there's one respect, I think,,in which being a cosmologist offered a special perspective,,and that's that it offers an awareness of the immense future.,The stupendous time spans of the evolutionary past,are now part of common culture --,outside the American Bible Belt, anyway --,(Laughter),but most people, even those who are familiar with evolution,,aren't mindful that even more time lies ahead. 
 The sun has been shining for four and a half billion years,,but it'll be another six billion years before its fuel runs out.,On that schematic picture, a sort of time-lapse picture, we're halfway.,And it'll be another six billion before that happens,,and any remaining life on Earth is vaporized.,There's an unthinking tendency to imagine that humans will be there,,experiencing the sun's demise,,but any life and intelligence that exists then,will be as different from us as we are from bacteria.,The unfolding of intelligence and complexity,still has immensely far to go, here on Earth and probably far beyond.,So we are still at the beginning of the emergence of complexity,in our Earth and beyond.,If you represent the Earth's lifetime by a single year,,say from January when it was made to December,,the 21st-century would be a quarter of a second in June --,a tiny fraction of the year.,But even in this concertinaed cosmic perspective,,our century is very, very special,,the first when humans can change themselves and their home planet. 
 As I should have shown this earlier,,it will not be humans who witness the end point of the sun;,it will be creatures as different from us as we are from bacteria.,When Einstein died in 1955,,one striking tribute to his global status was this cartoon,by Herblock in the Washington Post.,The plaque reads, "Albert Einstein lived here.",And I'd like to end with a vignette, as it were, inspired by this image.,We've been familiar for 40 years with this image:,the fragile beauty of land, ocean and clouds,,contrasted with the sterile moonscape,on which the astronauts left their footprints.,But let's suppose some aliens had been watching our pale blue dot,in the cosmos from afar, not just for 40 years,,but for the entire 4.5 billion-year history of our Earth.,What would they have seen?,Over nearly all that immense time,,Earth's appearance would have changed very gradually.,The only abrupt worldwide change,would have been major asteroid impacts or volcanic super-eruptions.,Apart from those brief traumas, nothing happens suddenly. 
 The continental landmasses drifted around.,Ice cover waxed and waned.,Successions of new species emerged, evolved and became extinct.,But in just a tiny sliver of the Earth's history,,the last one-millionth part, a few thousand years,,the patterns of vegetation altered much faster than before.,This signaled the start of agriculture.,Change has accelerated as human populations rose.,Then other things happened even more abruptly.,Within just 50 years --,that's one hundredth of one millionth of the Earth's age --,the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere started to rise,,and ominously fast. 
 The planet became an intense emitter of radio waves --,the total output from all TV and cell phones,and radar transmissions. And something else happened.,Metallic objects -- albeit very small ones, a few tons at most --,escaped into orbit around the Earth.,Some journeyed to the moons and planets.,A race of advanced extraterrestrials,watching our solar system from afar,could confidently predict Earth's final doom in another six billion years.,But could they have predicted this unprecedented spike,less than halfway through the Earth's life?,These human-induced alterations,occupying overall less than a millionth of the elapsed lifetime,and seemingly occurring with runaway speed?,If they continued their vigil,,what might these hypothetical aliens witness,in the next hundred years?,Will some spasm foreclose Earth's future?,Or will the biosphere stabilize?,Or will some of the metallic objects launched from the Earth,spawn new oases, a post-human life elsewhere? 
 The science done by the young Einstein will continue,as long as our civilization, but for civilization to survive,,we'll need the wisdom of the old Einstein --,humane, global and farseeing.,And whatever happens in this uniquely crucial century,will resonate into the remote future and perhaps far beyond the Earth,,far beyond the Earth as depicted here.,Thank you very much. 
 (Applause)I want to talk today about --,I've been asked to take the long view, and I'm going to tell you what,I think are the three biggest problems for humanity,from this long point of view.,Some of these have already been touched upon by other speakers,,which is encouraging.,It seems that there's not just one person,who thinks that these problems are important. 
 The first is -- death is a big problem.,If you look at the statistics,,the odds are not very favorable to us.,So far, most people who have lived have also died.,Roughly 90 percent of everybody who has been alive has died by now.,So the annual death rate adds up to 150,000 --,sorry, the daily death rate -- 150,000 people per day,,which is a huge number by any standard.,The annual death rate, then, becomes 56 million.,If we just look at the single, biggest cause of death -- aging --,it accounts for roughly two-thirds of all human people who die.,That adds up to an annual death toll,of greater than the population of Canada.,Sometimes, we don't see a problem,because either it's too familiar or it's too big.,Can't see it because it's too big.,I think death might be both too familiar and too big,for most people to see it as a problem. 
 Once you think about it, you see this is not statistical points;,these are -- let's see, how far have I talked?,I've talked for three minutes.,So that would be, roughly, 324 people have died since I've begun speaking.,People like -- it's roughly the population in this room has just died.,Now, the human cost of that is obvious,,once you start to think about it -- the suffering, the loss --,it's also, economically, enormously wasteful.,I just look at the information, and knowledge, and experience,that is lost due to natural causes of death in general,,and aging, in particular. 
 Suppose we approximated one person with one book?,Now, of course, this is an underestimation.,A person's lifetime of learning and experience,is a lot more than you could put into a single book.,But let's suppose we did this.,52 million people die of natural causes each year,corresponds, then, to 52 million volumes destroyed.,Library of Congress holds 18 million volumes.,We are upset about the burning of the Library of Alexandria.,It's one of the great cultural tragedies,that we remember, even today.,But this is the equivalent of three Libraries of Congress --,burnt down, forever lost -- each year. 
 So that's the first big problem.,And I wish Godspeed to Aubrey de Grey,,and other people like him,,to try to do something about this as soon as possible.,Existential risk -- the second big problem.,Existential risk is a threat to human survival, or to the long-term potential of our species.,Now, why do I say that this is a big problem?,Well, let's first look at the probability --,and this is very, very difficult to estimate --,but there have been only four studies on this in recent years,,which is surprising.,You would think that it would be of some interest,to try to find out more about this given that the stakes are so big,,but it's a very neglected area. 
 But there have been four studies --,one by John Lesley, wrote a book on this.,He estimated a probability that we will fail,to survive the current century: 50 percent.,Similarly, the Astronomer Royal, whom we heard speak yesterday,,also has a 50 percent probability estimate.,Another author doesn't give any numerical estimate,,but says the probability is significant that it will fail.,I wrote a long paper on this.,I said assigning a less than 20 percent probability would be a mistake,in light of the current evidence we have.,Now, the exact figures here,,we should take with a big grain of salt,,but there seems to be a consensus that the risk is substantial.,Everybody who has looked at this and studied it agrees. 
 Now, if we think about what just reducing,the probability of human extinction by just one percentage point --,not very much -- so that's equivalent to 60 million lives saved,,if we just count the currently living people, the current generation.,Now one percent of six billion people is equivalent to 60 million.,So that's a large number.,If we were to take into account future generations,that will never come into existence if we blow ourselves up,,then the figure becomes astronomical.,If we could eventually colonize a chunk of the universe --,the Virgo supercluster --,maybe it will take us 100 million years to get there,,but if we go extinct we never will.,Then, even a one percentage point reduction,in the extinction risk could be equivalent,to this astronomical number -- 10 to the power of 32. 
 So if you take into account future generations as much as our own,,every other moral imperative of philanthropic cost just becomes irrelevant.,The only thing you should focus on,would be to reduce existential risk,because even the tiniest decrease in existential risk,would just overwhelm any other benefit you could hope to achieve.,And even if you just look at the current people,,and ignore the potential that would be lost if we went extinct,,it should still have a high priority.,Now, let me spend the rest of my time on the third big problem,,because it's more subtle and perhaps difficult to grasp.,Think about some time in your life --,some people might never have experienced it -- but some people,,there are just those moments that you have experienced,where life was fantastic. 
 It might have been at the moment of some great, creative inspiration,you might have had when you just entered this flow stage.,Or when you understood something you had never done before.,Or perhaps in the ecstasy of romantic love.,Or an aesthetic experience -- a sunset or a great piece of art.,Every once in a while we have these moments,,and we realize just how good life can be when it's at its best.,And you wonder, why can't it be like that all the time?,You just want to cling onto this.,And then, of course, it drifts back into ordinary life and the memory fades.,And it's really difficult to recall, in a normal frame of mind,,just how good life can be at its best.,Or how bad it can be at its worst. 
 The third big problem is that life isn't usually,as wonderful as it could be.,I think that's a big, big problem.,It's easy to say what we don't want.,Here are a number of things that we don't want --,illness, involuntary death, unnecessary suffering, cruelty,,stunted growth, memory loss, ignorance, absence of creativity.,Suppose we fixed these things -- we did something about all of these.,We were very successful.,We got rid of all of these things.,We might end up with something like this,,which is -- I mean, it's a heck of a lot better than that.,But is this really the best we can dream of?,Is this the best we can do? 
 Or is it possible to find something a little bit more inspiring to work towards?,And if we think about this,,I think it's very clear that there are ways,in which we could change things, not just by eliminating negatives,,but adding positives.,On my wish list, at least, would be:,much longer, healthier lives, greater subjective well-being,,enhanced cognitive capacities, more knowledge and understanding,,unlimited opportunity for personal growth,beyond our current biological limits, better relationships,,an unbounded potential for spiritual, moral,and intellectual development. 
 If we want to achieve this, what, in the world, would have to change?,And this is the answer -- we would have to change.,Not just the world around us, but we, ourselves.,Not just the way we think about the world, but the way we are -- our very biology.,Human nature would have to change.,Now, when we think about changing human nature,,the first thing that comes to mind,are these human modification technologies --,growth hormone therapy, cosmetic surgery,,stimulants like Ritalin, Adderall, anti-depressants,,anabolic steroids, artificial hearts.,It's a pretty pathetic list.,They do great things for a few people,who suffer from some specific condition,,but for most people, they don't really transform,what it is to be human.,And they also all seem a little bit --,most people have this instinct that, well, sure,,there needs to be anti-depressants for the really depressed people.,But there's a kind of queasiness,that these are unnatural in some way. 
 It's worth recalling that there are a lot of other,modification technologies and enhancement technologies that we use.,We have skin enhancements, clothing.,As far as I can see, all of you are users of this,enhancement technology in this room, so that's a great thing.,Mood modifiers have been used from time immemorial --,caffeine, alcohol, nicotine, immune system enhancement,,vision enhancement, anesthetics --,we take that very much for granted,,but just think about how great progress that is --,like, having an operation before anesthetics was not fun.,Contraceptives, cosmetics and brain reprogramming techniques --,that sounds ominous, 
 but the distinction between what is a technology --,a gadget would be the archetype --,and other ways of changing and rewriting human nature is quite subtle.,So if you think about what it means to learn arithmetic or to learn to read,,you're actually, literally rewriting your own brain.,You're changing the microstructure of your brain as you go along.,So in a broad sense, we don't need to think about technology,as only little gadgets, like these things here,,but even institutions and techniques,,psychological methods and so forth.,Forms of organization can have a profound impact on human nature. 
 Looking ahead, there is a range of technologies,that are almost certain to be developed sooner or later.,We are very ignorant about what the time scale for these things are,,but they all are consistent with everything we know,about physical laws, laws of chemistry, etc.,It's possible to assume,,setting aside a possibility of catastrophe,,that sooner or later we will develop all of these.,And even just a couple of these would be enough,to transform the human condition. 
 So let's look at some of the dimensions of human nature,that seem to leave room for improvement.,Health span is a big and urgent thing,,because if you're not alive,,then all the other things will be to little avail.,Intellectual capacity -- let's take that box,,which falls into a lot of different sub-categories:,memory, concentration, mental energy, intelligence, empathy.,These are really great things.,Part of the reason why we value these traits,is that they make us better at competing with other people --,they're positional goods.,But part of the reason --,and that's the reason why we have ethical ground for pursuing these --,is that they're also intrinsically valuable.,It's just better to be able to understand more of the world around you,and the people that you are communicating with,,and to remember what you have learned.,Modalities and special faculties.,Now, the human mind is not a single unitary information processor,,but it has a lot of different, special, evolved modules,that do specific things for us.,If you think about what we normally take as giving life a lot of its meaning --,music, humor, eroticism, spirituality, aesthetics,,nurturing and caring, gossip, chatting with people -- 
 all of these, very likely, are enabled by a special circuitry,that we humans have,,but that you could have another intelligent life form that lacks these.,We're just lucky that we have the requisite neural machinery,to process music and to appreciate it and enjoy it.,All of these would enable, in principle -- be amenable to enhancement.,Some people have a better musical ability,and ability to appreciate music than others have.,It's also interesting to think about what other things are --,so if these all enabled great values,,why should we think that evolution has happened to provide us,with all the modalities we would need to engage,with other values that there might be? 
 Imagine a species,that just didn't have this neural machinery for processing music.,And they would just stare at us with bafflement,when we spend time listening to a beautiful performance,,like the one we just heard -- because of people making stupid movements,,and they would be really irritated and wouldn't see what we were up to.,But maybe they have another faculty, something else,that would seem equally irrational to us,,but they actually tap into some great possible value there.,But we are just literally deaf to that kind of value.,So we could think of adding on different,,new sensory capacities and mental faculties.,Bodily functionality and morphology and affective self-control.,Greater subjective well-being.,Be able to switch between relaxation and activity --,being able to go slow when you need to do that, and to speed up.,Able to switch back and forth more easily,would be a neat thing to be able to do --,easier to achieve the flow state,,when you're totally immersed in something you are doing.,Conscientiousness and sympathy.,The ability to -- it's another interesting application,that would have large social ramification, perhaps.,If you could actually choose to preserve your romantic attachments to one person,,undiminished through time,,so that wouldn't have to -- love would never have to fade if you didn't want it to.,That's probably not all that difficult.,It might just be a simple hormone or something that could do this. 
 It's been done in voles.,You can engineer a prairie vole to become monogamous,when it's naturally polygamous.,It's just a single gene.,Might be more complicated in humans, but perhaps not that much.,This is the last picture that I want to --,now we've got to use the laser pointer.,A possible mode of being here would be a way of life --,a way of being, experiencing, thinking, seeing,,interacting with the world.,Down here in this little corner, here, we have the little sub-space,of this larger space that is accessible to human beings --,beings with our biological capacities.,It's a part of the space that's accessible to animals;,since we are animals, we are a subset of that. 
 And then you can imagine some enhancements of human capacities.,There would be different modes of being you could experience,if you were able to stay alive for, say, 200 years.,Then you could live sorts of lives and accumulate wisdoms,that are just not possible for humans as we currently are.,So then, you move off to this larger sphere of "human +,",and you could continue that process and eventually,explore a lot of this larger space of possible modes of being. 
 Now, why is that a good thing to do?,Well, we know already that in this little human circle there,,there are these enormously wonderful and worthwhile modes of being --,human life at its best is wonderful.,We have no reason to believe that within this much, much larger space,there would not also be extremely worthwhile modes of being,,perhaps ones that would be way beyond our wildest ability,even to imagine or dream about.,And so, to fix this third problem,,I think we need -- slowly, carefully, with ethical wisdom and constraint --,develop the means that enable us to go out in this larger space and explore it,and find the great values that might hide there.,Thanks.Hello. Actually, that's "hello" in Bauer Bodoni,for the typographically hysterical amongst us.,One of the threads that seems to have come through,loud and clear in the last couple of days,is this need to reconcile what the Big wants --,the "Big" being the organization, the system, the country --,and what the "Small" wants -- the individual, the person.,And how do you bring those two things together?,Charlie Ledbetter, yesterday, I thought, talked very articulately,about this need to bring consumers, to bring people,into the process of creating things.,And that's what I want to talk about today.,So, bringing together the Small to help facilitate and create the Big,,I think, is something that we believe in -- something I believe in,,and something that we kind of bring to life,through what we do at Ideo. 
 I call this first chapter -- for the Brits in the room --,the "Blinding Glimpse of the Bleeding Obvious.",Often, the good ideas are so staring-at-you-right-in-the-face,that you kind of miss them. And I think, a lot of times,,what we do is just, sort of, hold the mirror up to our clients, and sort of go,,"Duh! You know, look what's really going on.",And rather than talk about it in the theory,,I think I'm just going to show you an example.,We were asked by a large healthcare system in Minnesota,to describe to them what their patient experience was.,And I think they were expecting --,they'd worked with lots of consultants before --,I think they were expecting some kind of hideous org chart,with thousands of bubbles and systemic this, that and the other,,and all kinds of mappy stuff.,Or even worse, some kind of ghastly death-by-Powerpoint thing,with WowCharts and all kinds of, you know, God knows, whatever. 
 The first thing we actually shared with them was this.,I'll play this until your eyeballs completely dissolve.,This is 59 seconds into the film.,This is a minute 59.,3:19.,I think something happens. I think a head may appear in a second.,5:10.,5:58.,6:20.,We showed them the whole cut,,and they were all completely, what is this?,And the point is when you lie in a hospital bed all day,,all you do is look at the roof, and it's a really shitty experience.,And just putting yourself in the position of the patient -- 
 this is Christian, who works with us at Ideo.,He just lay in the hospital bed,,and, kind of, stared at the polystyrene ceiling tiles,for a really long time.,That's what it's like to be a patient in the hospital.,And they were sort, you know, blinding glimpse of bleeding obvious.,Oh, my goodness. So, looking at the situation,from the point of view of the person out --,as opposed to the traditional position of the organization in --,was, for these guys, quite a revelation.,And so, that was a really catalytic thing for them.,So they snapped into action.,They said, OK, it's not about systemic change.,It's not about huge, ridiculous things that we need to do.,It's about tiny things that can make a huge amount of difference. 
 So we started with them prototyping some really little things,that we could do to have a huge amount of impact.,The first thing we did was we took a little bicycle mirror,and we Band-Aided it here, onto a gurney, a hospital trolley,,so that when you were wheeled around by a nurse or by a doctor,,you could actually have a conversation with them.,You could, kind of, see them in your rear-view mirror,,so it created a tiny human interaction.,Very small example of something that they could do.,Interestingly, the nurses themselves, sort of, snapped into action --,said, OK, we embrace this. What can we do?,The first thing they do is they decorated the ceiling.,Which I thought was really -- I showed this to my mother recently.,I think my mother now thinks that I'm some sort of interior decorator.,It's what I do for a living, sort of Laurence Llewelyn-Bowen.,Not particularly the world's best design solution,for those of us who are real, sort of, hard-core designers,,but nonetheless, a fabulous empathic solution for people.,Things that they started doing themselves --,like changing the floor going into the patient's room,so that it signified, "This is my room. This is my personal space" --,was a really interesting sort of design solution to the problem. 
 So you went from public space to private space.,And another idea, again, that came from one of the nurses -- which I love --,was they took traditional, sort of, corporate white boards,,then they put them on one wall of the patient's room,,and they put this sticker there.,So that what you could actually do was go into the room,and write messages to the person who was sick in that room,,which was lovely.,So, tiny, tiny, tiny solutions that made a huge amount of impact.,I thought that was a really, really nice example. 
 So this is not particularly a new idea,,kind of, seeing opportunities in things that are around you,and snapping and turning them into a solution.,It's a history of invention based around this.,I'm going to read this because I want to get these names right.,Joan Ganz Cooney saw her daughter -- came down on a Saturday morning,,saw her daughter watching the test card,,waiting for programs to come on one morning,and from that came Sesame Street.,Malcolm McLean was moving from one country to another,and was wondering why it took these guys so long,to get the boxes onto the ship.,And he invented the shipping container.,George de Mestral -- this is not bugs all over a Birkenstock --,was walking his dog in a field and got covered in burrs,,sort of little prickly things, and from that came Velcro. 
 And finally, for the Brits, Percy Shaw -- this is a big British invention --,saw the cat's eyes at the side of the road,,when he was driving home one night and from that came the Catseye.,So there's a whole series of just using your eyes,,seeing things for the first time, seeing things afresh,and using them as an opportunity to create new possibilities.,Second one, without sounding overly Zen,,and this is a quote from the Buddha:,"Finding yourself in the margins, looking to the edges of things,,is often a really interesting place to start.",Blinkered vision tends to produce, I think, blinkered solutions.,So, looking wide, using your peripheral vision,,is a really interesting place to look for opportunity. 
 Again, another medical example here.,We were asked by a device producer --,we did the Palm Pilot and the Treo.,We did a lot of sexy tech at Ideo --,they'd seen this and they wanted a sexy piece of technology,for medical diagnostics.,This was a device that a nurse uses,when they're doing a spinal procedure in hospital.,They'll ask the nurses to input data.,And they had this vision of the nurse, kind of, clicking away,on this aluminum device,and it all being incredibly, sort of, gadget-lustish.,When we actually went and watched this procedure taking place --,and I'll explain this in a second --,it became very obvious that there was a human dimension to this,that they really weren't recognizing.,When you're having a four-inch needle inserted into your spine --,which was the procedure that this device's data was about;,it was for pain management -- you're shit scared; you're freaking out.,And so the first thing that pretty much every nurse did,,was hold the patient's hand to comfort them. Human gesture --,which made the fabulous two-handed data input completely impossible. 
 So, the thing that we designed, much less sexy,but much more human and practical, was this.,So, it's not a Palm Pilot by any stretch of the imagination,,but it has a thumb-scroll so you can do everything with one hand.,So, again, going back to this -- the idea that a tiny human gesture,dictated the design of this product.,And I think that's really, really important.,So, again, this idea of workarounds.,We use this phrase "workarounds" a lot,,sort of, looking around us. I was actually looking around the TED,and just watching all of these kind of things happen,while I've been here.,This idea of the way that people cobble together solutions in our life --,and the things we kind of do in our environment,that are somewhat subconscious but have huge potential --,is something that we look at a lot. 
 We wrote a book recently, I think you might have received it,,called "Thoughtless Acts?",It's been all about these kind of thoughtless things that people do,,which have huge intention and huge opportunity.,Why do we all follow the line in the street?,This is a picture in a Japanese subway.,People consciously follow things even though, why, we don't know.,Why do we line up the square milk carton with the square fence?,Because we kind of have to -- we're just compelled to.,We don't know why, but we do.,Why do we wrap the teabag string around the cup handle?,Again, we're sort of using the world around us,to create our own design solutions.,And we're always saying to our clients: "You should look at this stuff.,This stuff is really important. This stuff is really vital.",This is people designing their own experiences.,You can draw from this.,We sort of assume that because there's a pole in the street,,that it's okay to use it, so we park our shopping cart there.,It's there for our use, on some level. 
 So, again, we sort of co-opt our environment,to do all these different things.,We co-opt other experiences --,we take one item and transfer it to another.,And this is my favorite one. My mother used to say to me,,"Just because your sister jumps in the lake doesn't mean you have to.",But, of course, we all do. We all follow each other every day.,So somebody assumes,that because somebody else has done something,,that's permission for them to do the same thing.,And there's almost this sort of semaphore around us all the time.,I mean, shopping bag equals "parking meter out of order.",And we all, kind of, know how to read these signals now.,We all talk to one another in this highly visual way,without realizing what we're doing.,Third section is this idea of not knowing,,of consciously putting yourself backwards.,I talk about unthinking situations all the time.,Sort of having beginner's mind, scraping your mind clean,and looking at things afresh. 
 A friend of mine was a designer at IKEA,,and he was asked by his boss,to help design a storage system for children.,This is the Billy bookcase -- it's IKEA's biggest selling product.,Hammer it together. Hammer it together with a shoe, if you're me,,because they're impossible to assemble.,But big selling bookcase. How do we replicate this for children?,The reality is when you actually watch children,,children don't think about things like storage in linear terms.,Children assume permission in a very different way.,Children live on things. They live under things.,They live around things,,and so their spatial awareness relationship,,and their thinking around storage is totally different.,So the first thing you have to do -- this is Graham, the designer --,is, sort of, put yourself in their shoes. And so, here he is,sitting under the table.,So, what came out of this?,This is the storage system that he designed.,So what is this? I hear you all ask. No, I don't. 
 (Laughter) 
 It's this, and I think this is a particularly lovely solution.,So, you know, it's a totally different way of looking at the situation.,It's a completely empathic solution --,apart from the fact that teddy's probably not loving it. 
 (Laughter) 
 But a really nice way of re-framing the ordinary,,and I think that's one of the things.,And putting yourself in the position of the person,,and I think that's one of the threads that I've heard again,from this conference is how do we put ourselves,in other peoples' shoes and really feel what they feel?,And then use that information to fuel solutions?,And I think that's what this is very much about.,Last section: green armband. We've all got them.,It's about this really.,I mean, it's about picking battles big enough to matter,but small enough to win.,Again, that's one of the themes,that I think has come through loud and clear in this conference,is: Where do we start? How do we start? What do we do to start?,So, again, we were asked to design a water pump,for a company called ApproTEC, in Kenya.,They're now called KickStart. 
 And, again, as designers,,we wanted to make this thing incredibly beautiful,and spend a lot of time thinking of the form.,And that was completely irrelevant.,When you put yourself in the position of these people,,things like the fact that this has to be able to fold up,and fit on a bicycle, become much more relevant,than the form of it. The way it's produced,,it has to be produced with indigenous manufacturing methods,and indigenous materials.,So it had to be looked at completely from the point of view of the user.,We had to completely transfer ourselves over to their world.,So what seems like a very clunky product,is, in fact, incredibly useful.,It's powered a bit like a Stairmaster -- you pump up and down on it.,Children can use it. Adults can use it. Everybody uses it.,It's turning these guys -- again, one of the themes --,it's turning them into entrepreneurs. 
 These guys are using this very successfully.,And for us, it's been great,because it's won loads of design awards.,So we actually managed to reconcile the needs of the design company,,the needs of the individuals in the company,,to feel good about a product we were actually designing,,and the needs of the individuals we were designing it for.,There it is, pumping water from 30 feet.,So as a final gesture we handed out these bracelets,to all of you this morning.,We've made a donation on everybody's behalf here,to kick start, no pun intended, their next project.,Because, again, I think, sort of, putting our money where our mouth is, here.,We feel that this is an important gesture.,So we've handed out bracelets. Small is the new big.,I hope you'll all wear them.,So that's it. Thank you. 
 (Applause)As other speakers have said, it's a rather daunting experience --,a particularly daunting experience -- to be speaking in front of this audience.,But unlike the other speakers, I'm not going to tell you about,the mysteries of the universe, or the wonders of evolution,,or the really clever, innovative ways people are attacking,the major inequalities in our world.,Or even the challenges of nation-states in the modern global economy.,My brief, as you've just heard, is to tell you about statistics --,and, to be more precise, to tell you some exciting things about statistics.,And that's --,(Laughter),-- that's rather more challenging,than all the speakers before me and all the ones coming after me.,(Laughter),One of my senior colleagues told me, when I was a youngster in this profession,,rather proudly, that statisticians were people who liked figures,but didn't have the personality skills to become accountants.,(Laughter),And there's another in-joke among statisticians, and that's,,"How do you tell the introverted statistician from the extroverted statistician?",To which the answer is,,"The extroverted statistician's the one who looks at the other person's shoes.",(Laughter),But I want to tell you something useful -- and here it is, so concentrate now.,This evening, there's a reception in the University's Museum of Natural History.,And it's a wonderful setting, as I hope you'll find,,and a great icon to the best of the Victorian tradition.,It's very unlikely -- in this special setting, and this collection of people --,but you might just find yourself talking to someone you'd rather wish that you weren't.,So here's what you do.,When they say to you, "What do you do?" -- you say, "I'm a statistician.",(Laughter),Well, except they've been pre-warned now, and they'll know you're making it up.,And then one of two things will happen.,They'll either discover their long-lost cousin in the other corner of the room,and run over and talk to them.,Or they'll suddenly become parched and/or hungry -- and often both --,and sprint off for a drink and some food.,And you'll be left in peace to talk to the person you really want to talk to. 
 It's one of the challenges in our profession to try and explain what we do.,We're not top on people's lists for dinner party guests and conversations and so on.,And it's something I've never really found a good way of doing.,But my wife -- who was then my girlfriend --,managed it much better than I've ever been able to.,Many years ago, when we first started going out, she was working for the BBC in Britain,,and I was, at that stage, working in America.,I was coming back to visit her.,She told this to one of her colleagues, who said, "Well, what does your boyfriend do?",Sarah thought quite hard about the things I'd explained --,and she concentrated, in those days, on listening.,(Laughter),Don't tell her I said that.,And she was thinking about the work I did developing mathematical models,for understanding evolution and modern genetics.,So when her colleague said, "What does he do?",She paused and said, "He models things.",(Laughter),Well, her colleague suddenly got much more interested than I had any right to expect,and went on and said, "What does he model?",Well, Sarah thought a little bit more about my work and said, "Genes.",(Laughter),"He models genes." 
 That is my first love, and that's what I'll tell you a little bit about.,What I want to do more generally is to get you thinking about,the place of uncertainty and randomness and chance in our world,,and how we react to that, and how well we do or don't think about it.,So you've had a pretty easy time up till now --,a few laughs, and all that kind of thing -- in the talks to date.,You've got to think, and I'm going to ask you some questions.,So here's the scene for the first question I'm going to ask you.,Can you imagine tossing a coin successively?,And for some reason -- which shall remain rather vague --,we're interested in a particular pattern.,Here's one -- a head, followed by a tail, followed by a tail. 
 So suppose we toss a coin repeatedly.,Then the pattern, head-tail-tail, that we've suddenly become fixated with happens here.,And you can count: one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, 10 --,it happens after the 10th toss.,So you might think there are more interesting things to do, but humor me for the moment.,Imagine this half of the audience each get out coins, and they toss them,until they first see the pattern head-tail-tail.,The first time they do it, maybe it happens after the 10th toss, as here.,The second time, maybe it's after the fourth toss.,The next time, after the 15th toss.,So you do that lots and lots of times, and you average those numbers.,That's what I want this side to think about. 
 The other half of the audience doesn't like head-tail-tail --,they think, for deep cultural reasons, that's boring --,and they're much more interested in a different pattern -- head-tail-head.,So, on this side, you get out your coins, and you toss and toss and toss.,And you count the number of times until the pattern head-tail-head appears,and you average them. OK?,So on this side, you've got a number --,you've done it lots of times, so you get it accurately --,which is the average number of tosses until head-tail-tail.,On this side, you've got a number -- the average number of tosses until head-tail-head. 
 So here's a deep mathematical fact --,if you've got two numbers, one of three things must be true.,Either they're the same, or this one's bigger than this one,,or this one's bigger than that one.,So what's going on here?,So you've all got to think about this, and you've all got to vote --,and we're not moving on.,And I don't want to end up in the two-minute silence,to give you more time to think about it, until everyone's expressed a view. OK.,So what you want to do is compare the average number of tosses until we first see,head-tail-head with the average number of tosses until we first see head-tail-tail. 
 Who thinks that A is true --,that, on average, it'll take longer to see head-tail-head than head-tail-tail?,Who thinks that B is true -- that on average, they're the same?,Who thinks that C is true -- that, on average, it'll take less time,to see head-tail-head than head-tail-tail?,OK, who hasn't voted yet? Because that's really naughty -- I said you had to.,(Laughter),OK. So most people think B is true.,And you might be relieved to know even rather distinguished mathematicians think that.,It's not. A is true here.,It takes longer, on average.,In fact, the average number of tosses till head-tail-head is 10,and the average number of tosses until head-tail-tail is eight.,How could that be?,Anything different about the two patterns?,There is. Head-tail-head overlaps itself.,If you went head-tail-head-tail-head, you can cunningly get two occurrences,of the pattern in only five tosses.,You can't do that with head-tail-tail.,That turns out to be important. 
 There are two ways of thinking about this.,I'll give you one of them.,So imagine -- let's suppose we're doing it.,On this side -- remember, you're excited about head-tail-tail;,you're excited about head-tail-head.,We start tossing a coin, and we get a head --,and you start sitting on the edge of your seat,because something great and wonderful, or awesome, might be about to happen.,The next toss is a tail -- you get really excited.,The champagne's on ice just next to you; you've got the glasses chilled to celebrate.,You're waiting with bated breath for the final toss.,And if it comes down a head, that's great.,You're done, and you celebrate.,If it's a tail -- well, rather disappointedly, you put the glasses away,and put the champagne back.,And you keep tossing, to wait for the next head, to get excited. 
 On this side, there's a different experience.,It's the same for the first two parts of the sequence.,You're a little bit excited with the first head --,you get rather more excited with the next tail.,Then you toss the coin.,If it's a tail, you crack open the champagne.,If it's a head you're disappointed,,but you're still a third of the way to your pattern again.,And that's an informal way of presenting it -- that's why there's a difference.,Another way of thinking about it --,if we tossed a coin eight million times,,then we'd expect a million head-tail-heads,and a million head-tail-tails -- but the head-tail-heads could occur in clumps.,So if you want to put a million things down amongst eight million positions,and you can have some of them overlapping, the clumps will be further apart.,It's another way of getting the intuition. 
 What's the point I want to make?,It's a very, very simple example, an easily stated question in probability,,which every -- you're in good company -- everybody gets wrong.,This is my little diversion into my real passion, which is genetics.,There's a connection between head-tail-heads and head-tail-tails in genetics,,and it's the following.,When you toss a coin, you get a sequence of heads and tails.,When you look at DNA, there's a sequence of not two things -- heads and tails --,but four letters -- As, Gs, Cs and Ts.,And there are little chemical scissors, called restriction enzymes,which cut DNA whenever they see particular patterns.,And they're an enormously useful tool in modern molecular biology.,And instead of asking the question, "How long until I see a head-tail-head?" --,you can ask, "How big will the chunks be when I use a restriction enzyme,which cuts whenever it sees G-A-A-G, for example?,How long will those chunks be?" 
 That's a rather trivial connection between probability and genetics.,There's a much deeper connection, which I don't have time to go into,and that is that modern genetics is a really exciting area of science.,And we'll hear some talks later in the conference specifically about that.,But it turns out that unlocking the secrets in the information generated by modern,experimental technologies, a key part of that has to do with fairly sophisticated --,you'll be relieved to know that I do something useful in my day job,,rather more sophisticated than the head-tail-head story --,but quite sophisticated computer modelings and mathematical modelings,and modern statistical techniques.,And I will give you two little snippets -- two examples --,of projects we're involved in in my group in Oxford,,both of which I think are rather exciting.,You know about the Human Genome Project.,That was a project which aimed to read one copy of the human genome.,The natural thing to do after you've done that --,and that's what this project, the International HapMap Project,,which is a collaboration between labs in five or six different countries.,Think of the Human Genome Project as learning what we've got in common,,and the HapMap Project is trying to understand,where there are differences between different people. 
 Why do we care about that?,Well, there are lots of reasons.,The most pressing one is that we want to understand how some differences,make some people susceptible to one disease -- type-2 diabetes, for example --,and other differences make people more susceptible to heart disease,,or stroke, or autism and so on.,That's one big project.,There's a second big project,,recently funded by the Wellcome Trust in this country,,involving very large studies --,thousands of individuals, with each of eight different diseases,,common diseases like type-1 and type-2 diabetes, and coronary heart disease,,bipolar disease and so on -- to try and understand the genetics.,To try and understand what it is about genetic differences that causes the diseases.,Why do we want to do that?,Because we understand very little about most human diseases.,We don't know what causes them.,And if we can get in at the bottom and understand the genetics,,we'll have a window on the way the disease works,,and a whole new way about thinking about disease therapies,and preventative treatment and so on.,So that's, as I said, the little diversion on my main love. 
 Back to some of the more mundane issues of thinking about uncertainty.,Here's another quiz for you --,now suppose we've got a test for a disease,which isn't infallible, but it's pretty good.,It gets it right 99 percent of the time.,And I take one of you, or I take someone off the street,,and I test them for the disease in question.,Let's suppose there's a test for HIV -- the virus that causes AIDS --,and the test says the person has the disease.,What's the chance that they do?,The test gets it right 99 percent of the time.,So a natural answer is 99 percent.,Who likes that answer?,Come on -- everyone's got to get involved.,Don't think you don't trust me anymore.,(Laughter),Well, you're right to be a bit skeptical, because that's not the answer.,That's what you might think.,It's not the answer, and it's not because it's only part of the story.,It actually depends on how common or how rare the disease is.,So let me try and illustrate that.,Here's a little caricature of a million individuals.,So let's think about a disease that affects --,it's pretty rare, it affects one person in 10,000.,Amongst these million individuals, most of them are healthy,and some of them will have the disease.,And in fact, if this is the prevalence of the disease,,about 100 will have the disease and the rest won't.,So now suppose we test them all.,What happens?,Well, amongst the 100 who do have the disease,,the test will get it right 99 percent of the time, and 99 will test positive.,Amongst all these other people who don't have the disease,,the test will get it right 99 percent of the time.,It'll only get it wrong one percent of the time.,But there are so many of them that there'll be an enormous number of false positives.,Put that another way --,of all of them who test positive -- so here they are, the individuals involved --,less than one in 100 actually have the disease.,So even though we think the test is accurate, the important part of the story is,there's another bit of information we need. 
 Here's the key intuition.,What we have to do, once we know the test is positive,,is to weigh up the plausibility, or the likelihood, of two competing explanations.,Each of those explanations has a likely bit and an unlikely bit.,One explanation is that the person doesn't have the disease --,that's overwhelmingly likely, if you pick someone at random --,but the test gets it wrong, which is unlikely.,The other explanation is that the person does have the disease -- that's unlikely --,but the test gets it right, which is likely.,And the number we end up with --,that number which is a little bit less than one in 100 --,is to do with how likely one of those explanations is relative to the other.,Each of them taken together is unlikely. 
 Here's a more topical example of exactly the same thing.,Those of you in Britain will know about what's become rather a celebrated case,of a woman called Sally Clark, who had two babies who died suddenly.,And initially, it was thought that they died of what's known informally as "cot death,",and more formally as "Sudden Infant Death Syndrome.",For various reasons, she was later charged with murder.,And at the trial, her trial, a very distinguished pediatrician gave evidence,that the chance of two cot deaths, innocent deaths, in a family like hers --,which was professional and non-smoking -- was one in 73 million.,To cut a long story short, she was convicted at the time.,Later, and fairly recently, acquitted on appeal -- in fact, on the second appeal.,And just to set it in context, you can imagine how awful it is for someone,to have lost one child, and then two, if they're innocent,,to be convicted of murdering them.,To be put through the stress of the trial, convicted of murdering them --,and to spend time in a women's prison, where all the other prisoners,think you killed your children -- is a really awful thing to happen to someone.,And it happened in large part here because the expert got the statistics,horribly wrong, in two different ways. 
 So where did he get the one in 73 million number?,He looked at some research, which said the chance of one cot death in a family,like Sally Clark's is about one in 8,500.,So he said, "I'll assume that if you have one cot death in a family,,the chance of a second child dying from cot death aren't changed.",So that's what statisticians would call an assumption of independence.,It's like saying, "If you toss a coin and get a head the first time,,that won't affect the chance of getting a head the second time.",So if you toss a coin twice, the chance of getting a head twice are a half --,that's the chance the first time -- times a half -- the chance a second time.,So he said, "Here,,I'll assume that these events are independent.,When you multiply 8,500 together twice,,you get about 73 million.",And none of this was stated to the court as an assumption,or presented to the jury that way.,Unfortunately here -- and, really, regrettably --,first of all, in a situation like this you'd have to verify it empirically.,And secondly, it's palpably false.,There are lots and lots of things that we don't know about sudden infant deaths.,It might well be that there are environmental factors that we're not aware of,,and it's pretty likely to be the case that there are,genetic factors we're not aware of.,So if a family suffers from one cot death, you'd put them in a high-risk group.,They've probably got these environmental risk factors,and/or genetic risk factors we don't know about.,And to argue, then, that the chance of a second death is as if you didn't know,that information is really silly.,It's worse than silly -- it's really bad science.,Nonetheless, that's how it was presented, and at trial nobody even argued it.,That's the first problem.,The second problem is, what does the number of one in 73 million mean?,So after Sally Clark was convicted --,you can imagine, it made rather a splash in the press --,one of the journalists from one of Britain's more reputable newspapers wrote that,what the expert had said was,,"The chance that she was innocent was one in 73 million.",Now, that's a logical error.,It's exactly the same logical error as the logical error of thinking that,after the disease test, which is 99 percent accurate,,the chance of having the disease is 99 percent.,In the disease example, we had to bear in mind two things,,one of which was the possibility that the test got it right or not.,And the other one was the chance, a priori, that the person had the disease or not.,It's exactly the same in this context.,There are two things involved -- two parts to the explanation.,We want to know how likely, or relatively how likely, two different explanations are.,One of them is that Sally Clark was innocent --,which is, a priori, overwhelmingly likely --,most mothers don't kill their children.,And the second part of the explanation,is that she suffered an incredibly unlikely event.,Not as unlikely as one in 73 million, but nonetheless rather unlikely.,The other explanation is that she was guilty.,Now, we probably think a priori that's unlikely.,And we certainly should think in the context of a criminal trial,that that's unlikely, because of the presumption of innocence.,And then if she were trying to kill the children, she succeeded.,So the chance that she's innocent isn't one in 73 million.,We don't know what it is.,It has to do with weighing up the strength of the other evidence against her,and the statistical evidence.,We know the children died.,What matters is how likely or unlikely, relative to each other,,the two explanations are.,And they're both implausible.,There's a situation where errors in statistics had really profound,and really unfortunate consequences.,In fact, there are two other women who were convicted on the basis of the,evidence of this pediatrician, who have subsequently been released on appeal.,Many cases were reviewed.,And it's particularly topical because he's currently facing a disrepute charge,at Britain's General Medical Council. 
 So just to conclude -- what are the take-home messages from this?,Well, we know that randomness and uncertainty and chance,are very much a part of our everyday life.,It's also true -- and, although, you, as a collective, are very special in many ways,,you're completely typical in not getting the examples I gave right.,It's very well documented that people get things wrong.,They make errors of logic in reasoning with uncertainty.,We can cope with the subtleties of language brilliantly --,and there are interesting evolutionary questions about how we got here.,We are not good at reasoning with uncertainty.,That's an issue in our everyday lives.,As you've heard from many of the talks, statistics underpins an enormous amount,of research in science -- in social science, in medicine,and indeed, quite a lot of industry.,All of quality control, which has had a major impact on industrial processing,,is underpinned by statistics.,It's something we're bad at doing.,At the very least, we should recognize that, and we tend not to.,To go back to the legal context, at the Sally Clark trial,all of the lawyers just accepted what the expert said.,So if a pediatrician had come out and said to a jury,,"I know how to build bridges. I've built one down the road.,Please drive your car home over it,",they would have said, "Well, pediatricians don't know how to build bridges.,That's what engineers do.",On the other hand, he came out and effectively said, or implied,,"I know how to reason with uncertainty. I know how to do statistics.",And everyone said, "Well, that's fine. He's an expert.",So we need to understand where our competence is and isn't.,Exactly the same kinds of issues arose in the early days of DNA profiling,,when scientists, and lawyers and in some cases judges,,routinely misrepresented evidence.,Usually -- one hopes -- innocently, but misrepresented evidence.,Forensic scientists said, "The chance that this guy's innocent is one in three million.",Even if you believe the number, just like the 73 million to one,,that's not what it meant.,And there have been celebrated appeal cases,in Britain and elsewhere because of that. 
 And just to finish in the context of the legal system.,It's all very well to say, "Let's do our best to present the evidence.",But more and more, in cases of DNA profiling -- this is another one --,we expect juries, who are ordinary people --,and it's documented they're very bad at this --,we expect juries to be able to cope with the sorts of reasoning that goes on.,In other spheres of life, if people argued -- well, except possibly for politics --,but in other spheres of life, if people argued illogically,,we'd say that's not a good thing.,We sort of expect it of politicians and don't hope for much more.,In the case of uncertainty, we get it wrong all the time --,and at the very least, we should be aware of that,,and ideally, we might try and do something about it.,Thanks very much.Let me show you some images,of what I consider to be the cities of tomorrow.,So, that's Kibera, the largest squatter community in Nairobi.,This is the squatter community in Sanjay Gandhi National Park,in Bombay, India, what's called Mumbai these days.,This is Hosinia, the largest and most urbanized favela,in Rio de Janeiro.,And this is Sultanbelyi,,which is one of the largest squatter communities in Istanbul.,They are what I consider to be the cities of tomorrow,,the new urban world. 
 Now, why do I say that?,To tell you about that I have to talk about this fellow here,,his name is Julius.,And I met Julius the last week that I was living in Kibera.,So, I had been there almost three months,,and I was touring around the city going to different squatter areas,and Julius was tagging along, and he was bug eyed,and at certain points we were walking around,,he grabbed my hand for support,,which is something most Kenyans would never consider doing.,They're very polite and they don't get so forward so quickly.,And I found out later that it was Julius' first day in Nairobi,,and he's one of many. 
 So, close to 200,000 people a day,migrate from the rural to the urban areas.,That's, and I'm going to be fair to the statisticians,who talked this morning, not almost 1.5 million people a week,,but almost 1.4 million people a week but I'm a journalist,,and we exaggerate, so almost 1.5 million people a week,,close to 70 million people a year.,And if you do the math, that's 130 people every minute.,So, that'll be -- in the 18 minutes that I'm given to talk here,,between two and three thousand people will have journeyed to the cities.,And here are the statistics.,Today -- a billion squatters,,one in six people on the planet.,2030 -- two billion squatters,,one in four people on the planet.,And the estimate is that in 2050, there'll be three billion squatters,,better than one in three people on earth.,So, these are the cities of the future, and we have to engage them. 
 And I was thinking this morning of the good life,,and before I show you the rest of my presentation,,I'm going to violate TED rules here,,and I'm going to read you something from my book as quickly as I can.,Because I think it says something about reversing our perception,of what we think the good life is. 
 So -- "The hut was made of corrugated metal, set on a concrete pad.,It was a 10 by 10 cell.,Armstrong O'Brian, Jr. shared it with three other men.,Armstrong and his friends had no water --,they bought it from a nearby tap owner --,no toilet -- the families in this compound shared a single pit-latrine --,and no sewers or sanitation.,They did have electricity,,but it was illegal service tapped from someone else's wires,,and could only power one feeble bulb.,This was Southland, a small shanty community,on the western side of Nairobi, Kenya.,But it could've been anywhere in the city,,because more than half the city of Nairobi lives like this.,1.5 million people stuffed into mud or metal huts,with no services, no toilets, no rights. 
 "Armstrong explained the brutal reality of their situation:,they paid 1,500 shillings in rent, about 20 bucks a month,,a relatively high price for a Kenyan shantytown,,and they could not afford to be late with the money.,'In case you owe one month, the landlord will come with his henchmen,and bundle you out. He will confiscate your things,' Armstrong said.,'Not one month, one day,' his roommate Hilary Kibagendi Onsomu,,who was cooking ugali, the spongy white cornmeal concoction,that is the staple food in the country, cut into the conversation.,They called their landlord a Wabenzi, meaning that he is a person,who has enough money to drive a Mercedes-Benz.,Hilary served the ugali with a fry of meat and tomatoes;,the sun slammed down on the thin steel roof;,and we perspired as we ate. 
 "After we finished, Armstrong straightened his tie,,put on a wool sports jacket, and we headed out into the glare.,Outside a mound of garbage formed the border,between Southland and the adjacent legal neighborhood of Langata.,It was perhaps eight feet tall, 40 feet long, and 10 feet wide.,And it was set in a wider watery ooze.,As we passed, two boys were climbing the mount Kenya of trash.,They couldn't have been more than five or six years old.,They were barefoot, and with each step their toes sank into the muck,sending hundreds of flies scattering from the rancid pile.,I thought they might be playing King of the Hill, but I was wrong.,Once atop the pile, one of the boys lowered his shorts,,squatted, and defecated.,The flies buzzed hungrily around his legs.,When 20 families -- 100 people or so -- share a single latrine,,a boy pooping on a garbage pile is perhaps no big thing.,But it stood in jarring contrast,to something Armstrong had said as we were eating --,that he treasured the quality of life in his neighborhood. 
 "For Armstrong, Southland wasn't constrained by its material conditions.,Instead, the human spirit radiated out,from the metal walls and garbage heaps to offer something,no legal neighborhood could: freedom.,'This place is very addictive,' he had said.,'It's a simple life, but nobody is restricting you.,Nobody is controlling what you do.,Once you have stayed here, you cannot go back.',He meant back beyond that mountain of trash,,back in the legal city, of legal buildings,,with legal leases and legal rights.,'Once you have stayed here,' he said,,'you can stay for the rest of your life.'" 
 So, he has hope, and this is where these communities start. 
 This is perhaps the most primitive shanty that you can find in Kibera,,little more than a stick-and-mud hut next to a garbage heap.,This is getting ready for the monsoon in Bombay, India.,This is home improvement:,putting plastic tarps on your roof. 
 This is in Rio de Janeiro, and it's getting a bit better, right?,We're seeing scavenged terra cotta tile and little pieces of signs,,and plaster over the brick, some color,,and this is Sulay Montakaya's house in Sultanbelyi, and it's getting even better.,He's got a fence; he scavenged a door;,he's got new tile on the roof. 
 And then you get Rocinha,and you can see that it's getting even better.,The buildings here are multi-story.,They develop -- you can see on the far right,one where it seems to just stack on top of each other,,room, after room, after room.,And what people do is they develop their home on one or two stories,,and they sell their loggia or roof rights,,and someone else builds on top of their building,,and then that person sells the roof rights,,and someone else builds on top of their building.,All of these buildings are made out of reinforced concrete and brick. 
 And then you get Sultanbelyi, in Turkey, where it's even built,to a higher level of design.,The crud in the front is mattress stuffing,,and you see that all over Turkey.,People dry out or air out their mattress stuffing on their roofs.,But the green building, on behind,,you can see that the top floor is not occupied,,so people are building with the possibility of expansion.,And it's built to a pretty high standard of design. 
 And then you finally get squatter homes like this,,which is built on the suburban model.,Hey, that's a single family home in the squatter community.,That's also in Istanbul, Turkey.,They're quite vital places, these communities. 
 This is the main drag of Rocinha, the Estrada da Gavea,,and there's a bus route that runs through it,,lots of people out on the street.,These communities in these cities are actually more vital,than the illegal communities.,They have more things going on in them. 
 This is a typical pathway in Rocinha called a "beco" --,these are how you get around the community.,It's on very steep ground.,They're built on the hills, inland from the beaches in Rio,,and you can see that the houses are just cantilevered over the natural obstructions.,So, that's just a rock in the hillside.,And these becos are normally very crowded,,and people hump furniture up them, or refrigerators up them,,all sorts of things.,Beer is all carried in on your shoulders.,Beer is a very important thing in Brazil. 
 This is commerce in Kenya, right along the train tracks,,so close to the train tracks that the merchants,sometimes have to pull the merchandise out of the way.,This is a marketplace, also in Kenya, Toi Market,,lots of dealers, in almost everything you want to buy.,Those green things in the foreground are mangoes. 
 This is a shopping street in Kibera,,and you can see that there's a soda dealer, a health clinic,,two beauty salons, a bar, two grocery stores, and a church, and more.,It's a typical downtown street; it just happens to be self-built.,This here, on the right-hand side,,is what's called a -- if you look at the fine print under the awning --,it's a hotel.,And what hotel means, in Kenya and India, is an eating-place.,So, that's a restaurant. 
 People steal electrical power -- this is Rio.,People tap in and they have thieves who are called "grillos" or "crickets,",and they steal the electrical power,and wire the neighborhood.,People burn trash to get rid of the garbage,,and they dig their own sewer channels.,Talk about more plastic bags than plankton.,And sometimes they have natural trash-disposal.,And when they have more money they cement their streets,,and they put in sewers and good water pipes, and stuff like that.,This is water going to Rio. People run their water pipes all over the place,,and that little hut right there has a pump in it, and that's what people do:,they steal electricity; they install a pump,and they tap into the water main, and pump water up to their houses. 
 So, the question is how do you go from the mud-hut village,,to the more developed city, to the even highly developed Sultanbelyi?,I say there are two things.,One is people need a guarantee they won't be evicted.,That does not necessarily mean property rights,,and I would disagree with Hernando de Soto on that question,,because property rights create a lot of complications.,They're most often sold to people, and people then wind up in debt,and have to pay back the debt,,and sometimes have to sell their property,in order to pay back the debt.,There's a whole variety of other reasons why property rights,sometimes don't work in these cases,,but they do need security of tenure.,And they need access to politics, and that can mean two things.,That can mean community organizing from below,,but it can also mean possibilities from above.,And I say that because the system in Turkey is notable. 
 Turkey has two great laws that protect squatters.,One is that -- it's called "gecekondu" in Turkish,,which means "built overnight," and if you build your house overnight,in Turkey, you can't be evicted without due process of law,,if they don't catch you during the night.,And the second aspect is that once you have 2,000 people,in the community, you can petition the government,to be recognized as a legal sub-municipality.,And when you're a legal sub-municipality, you suddenly have politics.,You're allowed to have an elected government, collect taxes,,provide municipal services, and that's exactly what they do. 
 So, these are the civic leaders of the future.,The woman in the center is Geeta Jiwa.,She lives in one of those tents on the highway median in Mumbai.,That's Sureka Gundi; she also lives with her family,on the tent along the same highway median.,They're very outspoken. They're very active.,They can be community leaders.,This woman is Nine, which means "grandma" in Turkish.,And there were three old ladies who lived in --,that's her self-built house behind her -- and they've lived there for 30 or 40 years,,and they are the backbone of the community there. 
 This is Richard Muthama Peter,,and he is an itinerant street photographer in Kibera.,He makes money taking pictures of the neighborhood,,and the people in the neighborhood,,and is a great resource in the community. 
 And finally my choice to run for mayor of Rio is Cezinio,,the fruit merchant with his two kids here,,and a more honest and giving and caring man I don't know. 
 The future of these communities is in the people,and in our ability to work with those people.,So, I think the message I take, from what I read from the book,,from what Armstrong said, and from all these people,,is that these are neighborhoods.,The issue is not urban poverty.,The issue is not the larger, over-arching thing.,The issue is for us to recognize that these are neighborhoods --,this is a legitimate form of urban development --,and that cities have to engage these residents,,because they are building the cities of the future. 
 Thank you very much.Video: Narrator: An event seen from one point of view,gives one impression.,Seen from another point of view, it gives quite a different impression.,But it's only when you get the whole picture you can fully understand,what's going on. 
 Sasha Vucinic: It's a great clip, isn't it?,And I found that in 29 seconds, it tells more about,the power of, and importance of, independent media,than I could say in an hour.,So I thought that it will be good to start with it.,And also start with a little bit of statistics.,According to relevant researchers, 83 percent of the population of this planet,lives in the societies without independent press.,Think about that number: 83 percent of the population on the whole planet,does not really know what is going on in their countries.,The information they get gets filtered through somebody,who either twists that information, or colors that information,,does something with it.,So they're deprived of understanding their reality.,That is just to understand how big and important this problem is.,Now those of you who are lucky enough to live in those societies,that represent 17 percent, I think should enjoy it until it lasts.,You know, Sunday morning, you flick the paper, get your cappuccino.,Enjoy it while it lasts.,Because as we heard yesterday, countries can lose stars from their flags,,but they can also lose press freedom,,as I guess Americans among us can tell us more about.,But that's totally another and separate topic.,So I can go back to my story. 
 My story starts -- the story I want to share -- starts in 1991.,At that time I was running B92, the only independent,,for that matter the only electronic media, in the country.,And I guess we were sharing -- we had that regular life of the only,independent media in the country, operating in hostile environment,,where government really wants to make your life miserable.,And there are different ways.,Yeah, it was the usual cocktail:,a little bit of threats, a little bit of friendly advice,,a little bit of financial police, a little bit of text control,,so you always have somebody who never leaves your office.,But what they really do, which is very powerful,,and that is what governments in the late '90s started doing,if they don't like independent media companies --,you know, they threaten your advertisers.,Once they threaten your advertisers, market forces are actually,,you know, destroyed, and the advertisers do not want to come --,no matter how much does it make sense for them --,do not want to come and advertise.,And you have a problem making ends meet. 
 At that time at the beginning of the '90s, we had that problem,,which was, you know, survival below one side,,but what was really painful for me was,,remember, the beginning of the '90s, Yugoslavia is falling apart.,We were sitting over there with a country in a downfall,,in a slow-motion downfall.,And we all had all of that on tapes.,We had the ability to understand what was going on.,We were actually recording history.,The problem was that we had to re-tape that history a week later;,because if we did not, we could not afford enough tapes,to keep archives of that history.,So if I gave you that picture, I don't want to go too long on that.,In that context a gentleman came to my office at that time.,It was still 1991.,He was running a media systems organization,which is still in business, the gentleman is still in business.,And what did I know at that time about media systems?,I would think media systems were organizations,,which means they should help you.,So I prepared two plans for that meeting, two strategic plans:,the small one and the big one.,The small one was, I just wanted him,to help us get those damn tapes,,so we can keep that archive for the next 50 years.,The big plan was to ask him for a 1,000,000-dollar loan.,Because I thought, I still maintain,,that serious and independent media companies are great business.,And I thought that B92 will survive and be a great company,once Milosevic is gone, which turned out to be true.,It's now probably either the biggest or the second biggest,media company in the country.,And I thought that the only thing that we needed at that time,was 1,000,000-dollar loan to take us through those hard times. 
 To make a long story short, the gentleman comes into the office,,great suit and tie.,I gave him what I thought was a brilliant explanation,of the political situation and explained how hard and difficult,the war will be.,Actually, I underestimated the atrocities, I have to admit.,Anyway, after that whole, big, long explanation,,the only question he had for me -- and this is not a joke --,is, are we paying royalties after we broadcast music,of Michael Jackson?,That was really the only question he had.,He left, and I remember being actually very angry at myself,because I thought there must be an institution in the world,that is providing loans to media companies.,It's so obvious, straight in your face,,and somebody must have thought of it.,Somebody must have started something like that.,And I thought, I'm just dumb and I cannot find it.,You know, in my defense, there was no Google at that time;,you could not just Google in '91.,So I thought that that's actually my problem.,Now we go from here, fast forward to 1995. 
 I have -- I left the country, I have a meeting with George Soros,,trying for the third time to convince him that,his foundation should invest in something that should,operate like a media bank.,And basically what I was saying is very simple.,You know, forget about charity; it doesn't work.,Forget about handouts; 20,000 dollars do not help anybody.,What you should do is you should treat media companies as a business.,It's business anywhere.,Media business, or any other business, it needs to be capitalized.,And what these guys need, actually, is access to capital.,So third meeting, arguments are pretty well exercised.,At the end of the meeting he says,,look, it is not going to work; you will never see your money back;,but my foundations will put 500,000 dollars so you can test the idea.,See that it will not work.,He said, I'll give you a rope to hang yourself.,(Laughter),I knew two things after that meeting.,First, under no circumstances I want to hang myself.,And second, that I have no idea how to make it work.,You see, at the level of a concept, it was a great concept.,But it's one thing to have a concept;,it's a totally separate thing to actually make it work. 
 So I had absolutely no idea how that could actually work.,Had the wrong idea; I thought that we can be a bank.,You see banks -- I don't know if there are any bankers over here;,I apologize in advance -- but it's the best job in the world.,You know, you find somebody who is respectable,and has a lot of money.,You give them more money; they repay you that over a time.,You collect interest and do nothing in between.,So I thought, why don't we get into that business?,(Laughter),So here we are having our first client, brilliant.,First independent newspaper in Slovakia.,The government cutting them off,from all the printing facilities in Bratislava.,So here's the daily newspaper,that has to be printed 400 kilometers away from the capital.,It's a daily newspaper with a deadline of 4 p.m.,That means that they have no sports;,they have no latest news; circulation goes down.,It's a kind of very nice, sophisticated way,how to economically strangle a daily newspaper.,They come to us with a request for a loan.,They want to -- the only way for them to survive,is to get a printing press.,And we said, that's fine; let's meet;,you'll bring us your business plan, which eventually they did. 
 We start the meeting.,I get these two pieces of paper, not like this, A4 format,,so it's much bigger.,A lot of numbers there. A lot of numbers.,But however you put it, you know, the numbers,do not make any sense.,And that's the best they could do.,We were the best that they could do.,So that is how we understood what our method is.,It's not a bank. We had to actually,go into these companies and earn our return,by fixing them -- by establishing management systems,,by providing all that knowledge, how do you run a business,on one side -- while they all know how to run, how to create content. 
 Just quickly on the results.,Over these 10 years, 40 million dollars in affordable financing,,average interest rate five percent to six percent.,Lately we are going wild, charging seven percent from time to time.,We do it in 17 countries of the developing world.,And here is the most stunning number.,Return rate -- the one that Soros was so worried about -- 97 percent.,97 percent of all the scheduled repayments came back to us on time.,What do we typically finance?,We finance anything that a media company would need,,from printing presses to transmitters.,What is most important is we do it,either in form of loans, equities, lease --,whatever is appropriate for, you know, supporting anybody.,But what is most important here is, who do we finance?,We believe that in the last 10 years companies,that we've financed are actually the best media companies,in the developing world.,That is a "Who is Who" list.,And I could spend hours talking about them,,because they're all kind of heroes.,And I can, but I'll give you just, maybe one,,and depending on time I may give you two examples,who we work with. 
 You see we started working in Eastern and Central Europe,,and moved to Russia.,Our first loan in Russia was in Chelyabinsk.,I'll bet half of you have never heard of that place.,In the south of Russia there's a guy called,Boris Nikolayevich Kirshin, who is running,an independent newspaper there.,The city was closed until early '90s,because, of all things, they were producing glass for Tupolev planes.,Anyway, he's running independent newspaper there.,After two years working with us, he becomes,the most respected newspaper in that small place.,Governor comes to him one day,,actually invites him to come to his office.,He goes and sees the governor. The governor says,,Boris Nikolayevich, I understand you are doing a great job,,and you are the most respected newspaper in our district.,And I want to offer you a deal.,Can you please give me your newspaper for the next nine months,,because I have elections --,there are elections coming up in nine months.,I will not run, but it's very important for me,who is going to succeed me.,So give me the paper for nine months. I'll give it back to you.,I have no interest in being in media business.,How much would that cost?,Boris Nikolayevich says, "It's not for sale.",The governor says, "We will close you.",Boris Nikolayevich says, "No, you cannot do it.",Six months later the newspaper was closed.,Luckily, we had enough time to help Boris Nikolayevich,take all the assets out of that company and bring him into a new one,,to get all the subscription lists, rehire staff.,So what the governor got was an empty shell.,But that is what happens if you're in business of independent media,,and if you are a banker for independent media.,So it sounds like a great story. 
 Somewhere down the road we opened a media management center.,We started our media lab, sounds like a real great story.,But there is a second angle to that.,The second angle, like in this clip.,If you take the camera above, you start thinking,about these numbers again.,40 million dollars over 10 years spread over 17 countries.,That is not too much, is it?,It's actually just a drop in the sea.,Because when you think about the importance,,some of the issues that we were talking about last night --,this last session we had about Africa and his,hypothetical 50 billion dollars destined for Africa.,All of those, not all, half of those problems mentioned last night --,government accountability, corruption, how do you fight corruption,,giving voice to unheard, to poor --,it's why independent media is in business.,And it's why it was invented.,So from that perspective, what we did is just really,one drop in the sea of that need that we can identify.,Now ours is just one story. 
 I'm sure that in this room there are, like, 15 other wonderful stories,of nonprofits doing spectacular work.,Here is where the problem is,,and I'll explain to you as well as I can what the problem is.,And it's called fundraising.,Imagine that this third of this room is filled,with people who represent different foundations.,Imagine two thirds over here running excellent organizations,,doing very important work.,Now imagine that every second person over here,is deaf, does not hear, and switch the lights off.,Now that is how difficult it is to match people,from this side of the room,with people of that side of the room.,So we thought that some kind of a big idea is needed,to reform, to totally rethink fundraising.,You know, instead of people running in this dark,,trying to find their own match, who will be willing,,who has the same goals.,Instead of all of that we thought there is --,something new needs to be invented.,And we came up with this idea of issuing bonds,,press freedom bonds.,If there are investors willing to finance,U.S. government budget deficit,,why wouldn't we find investors willing to finance,press freedom deficit?,We've decided to do it this fall; we will issue them,,probably in denominations of 1,000 dollars.,I don't want to advertise them too much; that's not the point.,But the point is, if we ever survive to actually issue them,,find enough investors that this can be considered a success,,there's nothing stopping the next organization,to start to issue bonds next spring.,And those can be environmental bonds.,And then two weeks later, Iqbal Quadir can issue his,electricity in Bangladesh bonds.,And before you know it, any social cause,can be actually financed in this way. 
 Now we do daydreaming in 11:30 with 55 seconds left.,But let's take the idea further.,You do it, you start it in the States, because it's,,you know, concepts are very, very close to American minds.,But you can actually bring it to Europe, too.,You can bring it to Asia.,You can, once you have all of those different points,,you can make it easy for investors.,Put all of those bonds at one place,and they sit down and click.,Once you have more than 10 of them,you have to develop some kind of a matrix.,What do investors get?,On one side financial, on the other side social.,So that brings the idea of some kind of rating agency,,Morningstar type.,It says, you know, social impact over here is spectacular, five stars.,Financial, they give you one percent, only one star.,Now take it to the last step.,Once you have all of that put together,,there's not one reason why you couldn't actually have,a marketplace for all of that,,where you cannot dispose of all of those bonds in a pretty quick way.,And in that way you organize the financing,so there are no dark rooms, no blind people,running around to find each other. 
 Thank you.I'm going to talk to you about some stuffnthat's in this book of mine,that I hope will resonate with othernthings you've already heard,,and I'll try to makensome connections myself,,in case you missed them. 
 But I want to start withnwhat I call the "official dogma.",The official dogma of what?,The official dogma of all Westernnindustrial societies.,And the official dogma runs like this:,if we are interested in maximizingnthe welfare of our citizens,,the way to do thatnis to maximize individual freedom.,The reason for this is both that freedomnis in and of itself good,,valuable, worthwhile,nessential to being human.,And because if people have freedom,,then each of us can act on our own,to do the thingsnthat will maximize our welfare,,and no one has to decide on our behalf.,The way to maximize freedomnis to maximize choice. 
 The more choice people have,nthe more freedom they have,,and the more freedom they have,,the more welfare they have.,This, I think, is so deeply embeddednin the water supply,that it wouldn't occurnto anyone to question it.,And it's also deeplynembedded in our lives.,I'll give you some examples,of what modern progressnhas made possible for us. 
 This is my supermarket.,Not such a big one.,I want to say just a wordnabout salad dressing.,175 salad dressings in my supermarket,,if you don't count the 10nextra-virgin olive oils,and 12 balsamic vinegars you could buy,to make a very large numbernof your own salad dressings,,in the off-chance that none of the 175nthe store has on offer suit you.,So this is what the supermarket is like.,And then you gonto the consumer electronics store,to set up a stereo system --,speakers, CD player,ntape player, tuner, amplifier --,and in this one singlenconsumer electronics store,,there are that many stereo systems.,We can construct six-and-a-half-millionndifferent stereo systems,out of the componentsnthat are on offer in one store. 
 You've got to admitnthat's a lot of choice.,In other domains --nthe world of communications.,There was a time, when I was a boy,,when you could get any kindnof telephone service you wanted,,as long as it came from Ma Bell.,You rented your phone. You didn't buy it.,One consequence of that, by the way,nis that the phone never broke.,And those days are gone.,We now have an almostnunlimited variety of phones,,especially in the world of cell phones.,These are cell phones of the future.,My favorite is the middle one --,the MP3 player, nose hair trimmer,nand crme brle torch. 
 (Laughter) 
 And if by some chance you haven'tnseen that in your store yet,,you can rest assurednthat one day soon, you will.,And what this does,is it leads people to walkninto their stores asking this question.,And do you know what the answernto this question now is?,The answer is "no.",It is not possible to buy a cell phonenthat doesn't do too much. 
 So, in other aspects of life that are muchnmore significant than buying things,,the same explosion of choice is true.,Health care.,It is no longer the casenin the United States,that you go to the doctor,nand the doctor tells you what to do.,Instead, you go to the doctor,,and the doctor tells you,n"Well, we could do A, or we could do B.,A has these benefits, and these risks.,B has these benefits, and these risks.,What do you want to do?",And you say, "Doc, what should I do?",And the doc says, "A hasnthese benefits and risks,,and B has these benefits and risks.,What do you want to do?",And you say, "If you were me,nDoc, what would you do?",And the doc says, "But I'm not you.",And the result is --nwe call it "patient autonomy,",which makes it sound like a good thing,,but it really is a shiftingnof the burden and the responsibility,for decision-making from somebodynwho knows something --,namely, the doctor --,to somebody who knows nothingnand is almost certainly sick,and thus not in the best shapento be making decisions --,namely, the patient.,There's enormous marketingnof prescription drugs,to people like you and me,,which, if you think about it,nmakes no sense at all,,since we can't buy them.,Why do they market to usnif we can't buy them?,The answer is that they expect usnto call our doctors the next morning,and ask for our prescriptionsnto be changed. 
 Something as dramatic as our identity,has now become a matter of choice,,as this slide is meant to indicate.,We don't inherit an identity;nwe get to invent it.,And we get to re-inventnourselves as often as we like.,And that means that every day,nwhen you wake up in the morning,,you have to decide what kindnof person you want to be.,With respect to marriage and family,,there was a time when the defaultnassumption that almost everyone had,is that you got marriednas soon as you could,,and then you started having kidsnas soon as you could.,The only real choice was who,,not when, and not what you did after. 
 Nowadays, everythingnis very much up for grabs.,I teach wonderfully intelligent students,,and I assign 20 percentnless work than I used to.,And it's not because they're less smart,,and it's not becausenthey're less diligent.,It's because they are preoccupied,nasking themselves,,"Should I get married or not?nShould I get married now?,Should I get married later?,Should I have kids first,nor a career first?",All of these are consuming questions.,And they're going to answernthese questions,,whether or not it meansnnot doing all the work I assign,and not getting a good gradenin my courses.,And indeed they should.,These are important questions to answer. 
 Work --,we are blessed, as Carl was pointing out,,with the technology that enables us,to work every minute of every daynfrom any place on the planet --,except the Randolph Hotel. 
 (Laughter) 
 (Applause) 
 There is one corner, by the way,,that I'm not going to tell anybody about,nwhere the WiFi actually works.,I'm not telling you about itnbecause I want to use it.,So what this means,,this incredible freedom of choicenwe have with respect to work,,is that we have to make a decision,,again and again and again,,about whether we shouldnor shouldn't be working.,We can go to watch our kid play soccer,,and we have our cell phone on one hip,,and our Blackberry on our other hip,,and our laptop, presumably, on our laps.,And even if they're all shut off,,every minute that we're watchingnour kid mutilate a soccer game,,we are also asking ourselves,,"Should I answer this cell phone call?,Should I respond to this email?nShould I draft this letter?",And even if the answernto the question is "no,",it's certainly going to makenthe experience of your kid's soccer game,very different than it would've been. 
 So everywhere we look,,big things and small things,nmaterial things and lifestyle things,,life is a matter of choice.,And the world we usednto live in looked like this.,[Well, actually,nthey are written in stone.],That is to say, there were some choices,,but not everything was a matter of choice.,And the world we now live innlooks like this. 
 [The Ten Commandments DYI Kit] 
 And the question is,nis this good news, or bad news?,And the answer is, "yes." 
 (Laughter) 
 We all know what's good about it,,so I'm going to talknabout what's bad about it.,All of this choice has two effects,,two negative effects on people.,One effect, paradoxically,,is that it produces paralysis,nrather than liberation.,With so many options to choose from,,people find it very difficultnto choose at all.,I'll give you one veryndramatic example of this:,a study that was done of investmentsnin voluntary retirement plans.,A colleague of mine got accessnto investment records from Vanguard,,the gigantic mutual-fund company,of about a million employeesnand about 2,000 different workplaces.,And what she found,is that for every 10 mutual fundsnthe employer offered,,rate of participationnwent down two percent.,You offer 50 funds -- 10 percentnfewer employees participate,than if you only offer five.,Why?,Because with 50 funds to choose from,,it's so damn hard to decidenwhich fund to choose,,that you'll just put it offnuntil tomorrow.,And then tomorrow,,and tomorrow, and tomorrow,,and of course tomorrow never comes.,Understand that not only does this mean,that people are going to havento eat dog food when they retire,because they don't havenenough money put away,,it also means that makingnthe decision is so hard,that they pass up significantnmatching money from the employer.,By not participating, they are passing upnas much as 5,000 dollars a year,from the employer,,who would happilynmatch their contribution. 
 So paralysis is a consequencenof having too many choices.,And I think it makesnthe world look like this. 
 [And lastly, for all eternity,nFrench, bleu cheese, or ranch?] 
 (Laughter) 
 You really want to get the decisionnright if it's for all eternity, right?,You don't want to pick the wrongnmutual fund, or the wrong salad dressing.,So that's one effect.,The second effect,is that even if we manage to overcomenthe paralysis and make a choice,,we end up less satisfiednwith the result of the choice,than we would be if we hadnfewer options to choose from.,And there are several reasons for this.,One of them,is that with a lot of differentnsalad dressings to choose from,,if you buy one, and it's not perfect --nand what salad dressing is? --,it's easy to imaginenyou could have made a different choice,that would have been better.,And what happens,is this imagined alternative induces younto regret the decision you made,,and this regret subtractsnfrom the satisfaction,you get out of the decision you made,,even if it was a good decision.,The more options there are,nthe easier it is to regret anything at all,that is disappointingnabout the option that you chose. 
 Second, what economistsncall "opportunity costs.",Dan Gilbert made a big point this morning,of talking about how much the waynin which we value things,depends on what we compare them to.,Well, when there are lotsnof alternatives to consider,,it is easy to imaginenthe attractive features,of alternatives that you reject,that make you less satisfiednwith the alternative that you've chosen.,Here's an example. 
 [I can't stop thinking about those othernavailable parking spaces on W 85th street] 
 Sorry if you're not New Yorkers.,Here's what you'rensupposed to be thinking.,Here's this couple on the Hamptons.,Very expensive real estate.,Gorgeous beach. Beautiful day.nThey have it all to themselves.,What could be better?,"Well, damn it," this guy is thinking,,"It's August. Everybodynin my Manhattan neighborhood is away.,I could be parkingnright in front of my building.",And he spends two weeks nagged by the idea,that he is missing the opportunity,,day after day, to havena great parking space.,Opportunity costs,subtract from the satisfactionnwe get out of what we choose,,even when what we choose is terrific.,And the more optionsnthere are to consider,,the more attractivenfeatures of these options,are going to be reflectednby us as opportunity costs. 
 Here's another example. 
 (Laughter) 
 Now this cartoon makes a lot of points.,It makes points about livingnin the moment as well,,and probably about doing things slowly.,But one point it makes,is that whenevernyou're choosing one thing,,you're choosing not to do other things,that may have lots of attractive features,,and it's going to makenwhat you're doing less attractive. 
 Third: escalation of expectations.,This hit me when I wentnto replace my jeans.,I wear jeans almost all the time.,There was a timenwhen jeans came in one flavor,,and you bought them,nand they fit like crap,,they were incredibly uncomfortable,,if you wore themnand washed them enough times,,they started to feel OK.,I went to replace my jeans after yearsnof wearing these old ones,,and I said, "I wantna pair of jeans. Here's my size.",And the shopkeeper said,,"Do you want slim fit,neasy fit, relaxed fit?,You want button fly or zipper fly?nYou want stonewashed or acid-washed?,Do you want them distressed?,You want boot cut, tapered, blah blah."nOn and on he went.,My jaw dropped.,And after I recovered, I said,,"I want the kind that usednto be the only kind." 
 (Laughter) 
 He had no idea what that was, 
 (Laughter) 
 so I spent an hour trying onnall these damn jeans,,and I walked out of the store -- truth! --,with the best-fitting jeansnI had ever had.,I did better. 
 All this choice madenit possible for me to do better.,But --,I felt worse.,Why? I wrote a whole booknto try to explain this to myself.,The reason -- 
 (Laughter) 
 The reason I felt worse is that,,with all of these options available,,my expectations about how goodna pair of jeans should be went up.,I had very low, no particular expectationsnwhen they only came in one flavor.,When they came in 100 flavors, damn it,none of them should've been perfect.,And what I got was good,nbut it wasn't perfect.,And so I compared what I gotnto what I expected,,and what I got was disappointingnin comparison to what I expected.,Adding options to people's lives,can't help but increasenthe expectations people have,about how good those options will be.,And what that's going to producenis less satisfaction with results,,even when they're good results.,Nobody in the worldnof marketing knows this. 
 [It all looks so great.nI can't wait to be disappointed.] 
 Because if they did, you wouldn't all knownwhat this was about.,The truth is more like this. 
 [Everything was better backnwhen everything was worse] 
 The reason that everything was betternback when everything was worse,is that when everything was worse,,it was actually possible for people,to have experiencesnthat were a pleasant surprise.,Nowadays, the world we live in --nwe affluent, industrialized citizens,,with perfection the expectation --,the best you can ever hope for,is that stuff is as goodnas you expect it to be.,You will never be pleasantly surprised,because your expectations,nmy expectations,,have gone through the roof.,The secret to happiness --nthis is what you all came for --,the secret to happiness,is low expectations. 
 (Laughter) 
 [You'll do] 
 (Applause) 
 (Laughter) 
 I want to say --,just a little autobiographical moment --,that I actually am married to a wife,,and she's really quite wonderful.,I couldn't have done better.,I didn't settle.,But settling isn'tnalways such a bad thing. 
 Finally --,One consequence of buyingna bad-fitting pair of jeans,when there is only one kind to buy,is that when you are dissatisfied,nand you ask why,,who's responsible,,the answer is clear:nthe world is responsible.,What could you do?,When there are hundredsnof different styles of jeans available,,and you buy one that is disappointing,,and you ask why, who's responsible?,It is equally clear that the answernto the question is "you.",You could have done better.,With a hundred different kindsnof jeans on display,,there is no excuse for failure.,And so when people make decisions,,and even though the resultsnof the decisions are good,,they feel disappointed about them;,they blame themselves. 
 Clinical depression has exploded,in the industrial worldnin the last generation.,I believe a significant -- not the only,nbut a significant -- contributor,to this explosion of depression,nand also suicide,,is that people have experiencesnthat are disappointing,because their standards are so high,,and then when they have to explainnthese experiences to themselves,,they think they're at fault.,And so the net result is that we donbetter in general, objectively,,and we feel worse.,So let me remind you.,This is the official dogma,nthe one that we all take to be true,,and it's all false.,It is not true.,There's no question that some choicenis better than none,,but it doesn't follow from that,that more choicenis better than some choice.,There's some magical amount.nI don't know what it is.,I'm pretty confident that we havenlong since passed the point,where options improve our welfare. 
 Now, as a policy matter --nI'm almost done --,as a policy matter,nthe thing to think about is this:,what enables all of this choice,in industrial societiesnis material affluence.,There are lots of places in the world,,and we have heard about several of them,,where their problemnis not that they have too much choice.,Their problemnis that they have too little.,So the stuff I'm talking aboutnis the peculiar problem,of modern, affluent, Western societies.,And what is so frustratingnand infuriating is this:,Steve Levitt talked to you yesterday,about how these expensivenand difficult-to-install child seats,don't help.,It's a waste of money.,What I'm telling you,is that these expensive,ncomplicated choices --,it's not simply that they don't help.,They actually hurt.,They actually make us worse off. 
 If some of what enablesnpeople in our societies,to make all of the choices we make,were shifted to societiesnin which people have too few options,,not only would thosenpeople's lives be improved,,but ours would be improved also,,which is what economists callna "Pareto-improving move.",Income redistribution will makeneveryone better off --,not just poor people --,because of how all this excessnchoice plagues us.,So to conclude.,[You can be anythingnyou want to be -- no limits],You're supposed to read this cartoon,nand, being a sophisticated person, say,,"Ah! What does this fish know?,You know, nothing is possiblenin this fishbowl.",Impoverished imagination,na myopic view of the world --,and that's the way I read it at first.,The more I thought about it, however,,the more I came to the viewnthat this fish knows something.,Because the truth of the matter,is that if you shatter the fishbowlnso that everything is possible,,you don't have freedom.,You have paralysis.,If you shatter this fishbowlnso that everything is possible,,you decrease satisfaction.,You increase paralysis,nand you decrease satisfaction. 
 Everybody needs a fishbowl.,This one is almostncertainly too limited --,perhaps even for the fish,ncertainly for us.,But the absence of some metaphoricalnfishbowl is a recipe for misery,,and, I suspect, disaster. 
 Thank you very much. 
 (Applause)